FORGOTTEN FUTURES XI:

ROLE-PLAYING IN THE WORLDS OF

STANLEY G. WEINBAUM’S
1930S SCIENCE FICTION

BY MARCUS L. ROWLAND

A Martian Odyssey
by
Stanley G. Weinbaum

J

ARVIS stretched himself as luxuriously as he could in the cramped general quarters of
the Ares.

“Air you can breathe!” he exulted. “It feels as thick as soup after the thin stuff out there!”
He nodded at the Martian landscape stretching flat and desolate in the light of the nearer
moon, beyond the glass of the port.
The other three stared at him sympathetically—Putz, the engineer, Leroy, the biologist, and Harrison,
the astronomer and captain of the expedition. Dick Jarvis was chemist of the famous crew, the Ares
expedition, first human beings to set foot on the mysterious ravelled of the earth, the planet Mars. This,
of course, was in the old days, less than twenty years after the mad American Doheny perfected the
atomic blast at the cost of his life, and only a decade after the equally mad Cardoza rode on it to the
moon. They were true pioneers, these four of the Ares. Except for a half-dozen moon expeditions and the
ill-fated de Lancey flight aimed at the seductive orb of Venus, they were the first men to feel other
gravity than earth’s, and certainly the first successful crew to leave the earth-moon system. And they
deserved that success when one considers the difficulties and discomforts—the months spent in
acclimatization chambers back on earth, learning to breathe the air as tenuous as that of Mars, the
challenging of the void in the tiny rocket driven by the cranky reaction motors of the twenty-first century,
and mostly the facing of an absolutely unknown world.
Jarvis stretched and fingered the raw and peeling tip of his frostbitten nose. He sighed again
contentedly.
“Well,” exploded Harrison abruptly, “are we going to hear what happened? You set out all shipshape
in an auxiliary rocket, we don’t get a peep for ten days, and finally Putz here picks you out of a lunatic
ant-heap with a freak ostrich as your pal! Spill it, man!”
“Speel?” queried Leroy perplexedly. “Speel what?”
“He means ‘spiel’,” explained Putz soberly. “It iss to tell.”
Jarvis met Harrison’s amused glance without the shadow of a smile. “That’s right, Karl,” he said in
grave agreement with Putz. “Ich spiel es!” He grunted comfortably and began.
“According to orders,” he said, “I watched Karl here take off toward the North, and then I got into
my flying sweat-box and headed south. You’ll remember, Cap—we had orders not to land, but just scout
about for points of interest. I set the two cameras clicking and buzzed along, riding pretty high—about
two thousand feet—for a couple of reasons. First, it gave the cameras a greater field, and second, the
under-jets travel so far in this half-vacuum they call air here that they stir up dust if you move low.”
“We know all that from Putz,” grunted Harrison. “I wish you’d saved the films, though. They’d have
paid the cost of this junket; remember how the public mobbed the first moon pictures?”
“The films are safe,” retorted Jarvis. “Well,” he resumed, “as I said, I buzzed along at a pretty good
clip; just as we figured, the wings haven’t much lift in this air at less than a hundred miles per hour, and
even then I had to use the under-jets.
“So, with the speed and the altitude and the blurring caused by the under-jets, the seeing wasn’t any
too good. I could see enough, though, to distinguish that what I sailed over was just more of this gray
plain that we’d been examining the whole week since our landing—same blobby growths and the same

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 1 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Stanley G. Weinbaum

Despite a tragically short life and
writing career, Stanley G. Weinbaum
(1902-1935) is generally considered
to be one of the “greats” of 1930s
science fiction, and one of SF’s classic
authors regardless of period.
He was born in Louisville, Kentucky
and studied chemical engineering, later
switching to English, at the University
of Wisconsin, but failed to graduate,
allegedly due to participation in a
cheating scandal, which led to him
leaving the university in 1923.
For the next ten years he managed a
movie theatre, writing in his spare time.
His first known work was a romantic
novel, The Lady Dances, sold in 1933
and serialised in 1934; his first SF was
the short story A Martian Odyssey, also
published in 1934. But at this point
Weinbaum was already seriously ill,
suffering from the lung cancer which
eventually killed him. It’s notable that
cancer is a recurring theme in his
stories; the narrator / hero of A Martian
Odyssey finds a stone which might be a
cure for cancer, the adventurers of
Parasite Planet are pursued by “doughpots,” explicitly described as giant
mobile cancers that eat anything
organic in their path.
Continued next page

eternal carpet of crawling little plant-animals, or biopods, as
Leroy calls them. So I sailed along, calling back my position
every hour as instructed, and not knowing whether you heard
me.”
“I did!” snapped Harrison.
“A hundred and fifty miles south,” continued Jarvis
imperturbably, “the surface changed to a sort of low plateau,
nothing but desert and orange-tinted sand. I figured that we
were right in our guess, then, and this gray plain we dropped on
was really the Mare Cimmerium which would make my orange
desert the region called Xanthus. If I were right, I ought to hit
another gray plain, the Mare Chronium in another couple of
hundred miles, and then another orange desert, Thyle I or II.
And so I did.”
“Putz verified our position a week and a half ago!” grumbled
the captain. “Let’s get to the point.”
“Coming!” remarked Jarvis. “Twenty miles into Thyle—
believe it or not—I crossed a canal!”
“Putz photographed a hundred! Let’s hear something new!”
“And did he also see a city?”
“Twenty of ‘em, if you call those heaps of mud cities!”
“Well,” observed Jarvis, “from here on I’ll be telling a few
things Putz didn’t see!” He rubbed his tingling nose, and
continued. “I knew that I had sixteen hours of daylight at this
season, so eight hours—eight hundred miles—from here, I
decided to turn back. I was still over Thyle, whether I or II I’m
not sure, not more than twenty-five miles into it. And right
there, Putz’s pet motor quit!”
“Quit? How?” Putz was solicitous.
“The atomic blast got weak. I started losing altitude right
away, and suddenly there I was with a thump right in the middle
of Thyle! Smashed my nose on the window, too!” He rubbed
the injured member ruefully.
“Did you maybe try vashing der combustion chamber mit
acid sulphuric?” inquired Putz. “Sometimes der lead giffs a
secondary radiation—”
“Naw!” said Jarvis disgustedly. “I wouldn’t try that, of
course—not more than ten times! Besides, the bump flattened
the landing gear and busted off the under-jets. Suppose I got the
thing working—what then? Ten miles with the blast coming right
out of the bottom and I’d have melted the floor from under
me!” He rubbed his nose again. “Lucky for me a pound only
weighs seven ounces here, or I’d have been mashed flat!”
“I could have fixed!” ejaculated the engineer. “I bet it vas not
serious.”
“Probably not,” agreed Jarvis sarcastically. “Only it wouldn’t
fly. Nothing serious, but I had the choice of waiting to be picked

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 2 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

up or trying to walk back—eight hundred miles, and perhaps
twenty days before we had to leave! Forty miles a day! Well,”
he concluded, “I chose to walk. Just as much chance of being
picked up, and it kept me busy.”
“We’d have found you,” said Harrison.
“No doubt. Anyway, I rigged up a harness from some seat
straps, and put the water tank on my back, took a cartridge belt
and revolver, and some iron rations, and started out.”
“Water tank!” exclaimed the little biologist, Leroy. “She
weigh one-quarter ton!”
“Wasn’t full. Weighed about two hundred and fifty pounds
earth-weight, which is eighty-five here. Then, besides, my own
personal two hundred and ten pounds is only seventy on Mars,
so, tank and all, I grossed a hundred and fifty-five, or fifty-five
pounds less than my everyday earth-weight. I figured on that
when I undertook the forty-mile daily stroll. Oh—of course I
took a thermo-skin sleeping bag for these wintry Martian nights.
“Off I went, bouncing along pretty quickly. Eight hours of
daylight meant twenty miles or more. It got tiresome, of
course—plugging along over a soft sand desert with nothing to
see, not even Leroy’s crawling biopods. But an hour or so
brought me to the canal—just a dry ditch about four hundred
feet wide, and straight as a railroad on its own company map.
“There’d been water in it sometime, though. The ditch was
covered with what looked like a nice green lawn. Only, as I
approached, the lawn moved out of my way!”
“Eh?” said Leroy.
“Yeah, it was a relative of your biopods. I caught one, a little
grass-like blade about as long as my finger, with two thin,
stemmy legs.”
“He is where?” Leroy was eager.
“He is let go! I had to move, so I plowed along with the
walking grass opening in front and closing behind. And then I
was out on the orange desert of Thyle again.
“I plugged steadily along, cussing the sand that made going
so tiresome, and, incidentally, cussing that cranky motor of
yours, Karl. It was just before twilight that I reached the edge of
Thyle, and looked down over the gray Mare Chronium. And I
knew there was seventy-five miles of that to be walked over, and
then a couple of hundred miles of that Xanthus desert, and
about as much more Mare Cimmerium. Was I pleased? I started
cussing you fellows for not picking me up!”
“We were trying, you sap!” said Harrison.
“That didn’t help. Well, I figured I might as well use what
was left of daylight in getting down the cliff that bounded Thyle.
I found an easy place, and down I went. Mare Chronium was
just the same sort of place as this—crazy leafless plants and a

Although he was increasingly ill,
Weinbaum wrote prolifically through
1934-5, and was working on another
romantic novel, Three Who Danced,
when he died in December 1935,
barely eighteen months after A Martian
Odyssey’s first publication. Much of
his work was published posthumously,
and one story, Tidal Moon, was little
more than notes at the time of his
death, completed by his sister.
Weinbaum wrote in a variety of
genres including crime and romance,
but is now chiefly remembered for his
science fiction, and in particular the
“Planetary” sequence, beginning with
his first SF story A Martian Odyssey
(1934), ten stories with a common
background describing the exploration
and exploitation of a consistently
detailed Solar System, and the first to
describe genuinely alien aliens, whose
lives, minds and societies were unlike
those of humans or any known human
culture. While this collection includes
several of Weinbaum’s other stories,
the Planetary stories are the primary
source for this game.
The Planetary stories are not
entirely consistent, but Weinbaum
probably never envisaged them as a
“future history” of the type many
subsequent authors have created.
Despite this they hang together
remarkably well, and it seems likely that
many discrepancies would have been
eliminated if they had been edited as a
single volume in Weinbaum’s lifetime.
Weinbaum’s other genre work
included numerous short stories and
three novels; The Black Flame (originally
two novelettes, Dawn of Flame and The
Black Flame), The New Adam (1939),
and The Dark Other (1950, horror).
One SF story, The Adaptive Ultimate,
was adapted into radio and TV plays,
and was filmed as She Devil in 1957.
Sources: The Encyclopaedia of Science Fiction
(Clute & Nicholls); Introduction to A
Martian Odyssey and other stories
(Moskowitz); Wikipedia.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 3 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

The ‘Planetary’ Sequence

Ten stories of exploration, trade and
adventure around the Solar System, the
main body of Weinbaum’s SF and the
primary source for this game:
A Martian Odyssey
July 1934
Valley of Dreams
Nov 1934
Flight on Titan
Jan 1935
Parasite Planet
Feb 1935
The Lotus Eaters
April 1935
The Planet of Doubt
Oct 1935
The Red Peri
Nov 1935
The Mad Moon
Dec 1935
Redemption Cairn
March 1936
Tidal Moon
Dec 1938
All except the last of these stories
accompany this collection; most of
Tidal Moon was written by Weinbaum’s
sister Helen (later Helen Kasson) and
the story is still in European copyright.
The rest of Weinbaum’s SF doesn’t
use the same background as the
Planetary series, although there are
occasional similarities; for example,
rockets in The Black Flame resemble the
eponymous spaceship of The Red Peri.
While most of his stories accompany
this collection, the remainder were not
used as direct source material, but
some of the ideas have been used to
add extra flavour in what follows.
Pygmalion's Spectacles
June 1935
The Worlds of If
Aug 1935
The Ideal
Sept 1935
The Adaptive Ultimate
Nov 1935
The Point of View
Jan 1936
Proteus Island
Aug 1936
Graph
Sept 1936
The Circle of Zero
Oct 1936
The Brink of Infinity
Dec 1936
Shifting Seas
July 1937
Dawn of Flame
Jan 1939
The Black Flame
June 1939
The New Adam
1939
Several stories and his novel The Dark
Other are not included because they
were co-written with other authors, or
were first published less than 70 years
ago and remain in European copyright.
Most can be found on line via Project
Gutenberg or Gutenberg Australia.

bunch of crawlers; I gave it a glance and hauled out my sleeping
bag. Up to that time, you know, I hadn’t seen anything worth
worrying about on this half-dead world—nothing dangerous, that
is.”
“Did you?” queried Harrison.
“Did I! You’ll hear about it when I come to it. Well, I was
just about to turn in when suddenly I heard the wildest sort of
shenanigans!”
“Vot iss shenanigans?” inquired Putz.
“He says, ‘Je ne sais quoi,’” explained Leroy. “It is to say, ‘I
don’t know what.’”
“That’s right,” agreed Jarvis. “I didn’t know what, so I
sneaked over to find out. There was a racket like a flock of
crows eating a bunch of canaries—whistles, cackles, caws, trills,
and what have you. I rounded a clump of stumps, and there was
Tweel!”
“Tweel?” said Harrison, and “Tveel?” said Leroy and Putz.
“That freak ostrich,” explained the narrator. “At least, Tweel
is as near as I can pronounce it without sputtering. He called it
something like ‘Trrrweerrll!’.”
“What was he doing?” asked the Captain.
“He was being eaten! And squealing, of course, as any one
would.”
“Eaten! By what?”
“I found out later. All I could see then was a bunch of black
ropy arms tangled around what looked like, as Putz described it
to you, an ostrich. I wasn’t going to interfere, naturally; if both
creatures were dangerous, I’d have one less to worry about.
“But the bird-like thing was putting up a good battle, dealing
vicious blows with an eighteen-inch beak, between screeches.
And besides, I caught a glimpse or two of what was on the end
of those arms!” Jarvis shuddered. “But the clincher was when I
noticed a little black bag or case hung about the neck of the
bird-thing! It was intelligent. That or tame, I assumed. Anyway,
it clinched my decision. I pulled out my automatic and fired into
what I could see of its antagonist.
“There was a flurry of tentacles and a spurt of black
corruption, and then the thing, with a disgusting sucking noise,
pulled itself and its arms into a hole in the ground. The other let
out a series of clacks, staggered around on legs about as thick as
golf sticks, and turned suddenly to face me. I held my weapon
ready, and the two of us stared at each other.
“The Martian wasn’t a bird, really. It wasn’t even bird-like,
except just at first glance. It had a beak all right, and a few
feathery appendages, but the beak wasn’t really a beak. It was
somewhat flexible; I could see the tip bend slowly from side to
side; it was almost like a cross between a beak and a trunk. It

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 4 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

had four-toed feet, and four-fingered things—hands, you’d have
to call them, and a little roundish body, and a long neck ending
in a tiny head—and that beak. It stood an inch or so taller than
I, and—well, Putz saw it!”
The engineer nodded. “Ja! I saw!”
Jarvis continued. “So—we stared at each other. Finally the
creature went into a series of clackings and twitterings and held
out its hands toward me, empty. I took that as a gesture of
friendship.”
“Perhaps,” suggested Harrison, “it looked at that nose of
yours and thought you were its brother!”
“Huh! You can be funny without talking! Anyway, I put up
my gun and said ‘Aw, don’t mention it,’ or something of the
sort, and the thing came over and we were pals.
“By that time, the sun was pretty low and I knew that I’d
better build a fire or get into my thermo-skin. I decided on the
fire. I picked a spot at the base of the Thyle cliff where the rock
could reflect a little heat on my back. I started breaking off
chunks of this desiccated Martian vegetation, and my companion
caught the idea and brought in an armful. I reached for a match,
but the Martian fished into his pouch and brought out
something that looked like a glowing coal; one touch of it, and
the fire was blazing—and you all know what a job we have
starting a fire in this atmosphere!
“And that bag of his!” continued the narrator. “That was a
manufactured article, my friends; press an end and she popped
open—press the middle and she sealed so perfectly you couldn’t
see the line. Better than zippers.
“Well, we stared at the fire for a while and I decided to
attempt some sort of communication with the Martian. I
pointed at myself and said ‘Dick’; he caught the drift
immediately, stretched a bony claw at me and repeated ‘Tick.’
Then I pointed at him, and he gave that whistle I called Tweel; I
can’t imitate his accent. Things were going smoothly; to
emphasize the names, I repeated ‘Dick,’ and then, pointing at
him, ‘Tweel.’
“There we stuck! He gave some clacks that sounded negative,
and said something like ‘P-p-p-root.’ And that was just the
beginning; I was always ‘Tick,’ but as for him—part of the time
he was ‘Tweel,’ and part of the time he was ‘P-p-p-proot,’ and
part of the time he was sixteen other noises!
“We just couldn’t connect. I tried ‘rock,’ and I tried ‘star,’
and ‘tree,’ and ‘fire.’ And Lord knows what else, and try as I
would, I couldn’t get a single word! Nothing was the same for
two successive minutes, and if that’s a language, I’m an
alchemist. Finally I gave it up and called him Tweel, and that
seemed to do.

This collection includes all but one of
the “Planetary” stories in PDF and
HTML format, but brief summaries
may be useful. These summaries include
numerous spoilers for the stories.

A Martian Odyssey
Valley of Dreams

Two stories chronicling the first flight
to Mars by the spaceship Ares.
In the first the narrator Jarvis
crashes during a reconnaissance flight
and rescues the Martian Tweel from a
Dream Beast (a hypnotic predator).
They explore together, encountering
various Martian species including
another Dream Beast, a silicon
pyramid-builder, and the enigmatic
mound-builders,
who
live
in
underground hives. They explore one
of the mounds and have to fight their
way out; during the escape they
separate, and Jarvis is rescued by a
rescue flight from the Ares.
In the second story, Jarvis and
another explorer return to the crash
site to recover films from the wreck,
and renew their contact with the
Martians. They spend several days
exploring a Martian city, meet Tweel
and more of the enigmatic Martians,
and narrowly escape a catastrophic
encounter with Dream Beasts.

Flight on Titan

Following a financial crash Tim Vick
and his wife Diana travel to Titan to
seek flame gems, the most valuable
jewels in the solar system, and make
their fortunes. A natural catastrophe
forces them to flee their trading post
and travel across country to the
colonial capital. Along the way they
lose all but one of the gems, encounter
several Martian animals, and eventually
discover that flame gems can be grown
in Titan’s soil.
Some discrepancies in the timing
and background of this story are
discussed in more detail in the
Timeline.
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 5 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Parasite Planet
The Lotus Eaters
Linked stories set on Venus.
In the first story trader “Ham”
Hammond loses his swamp home in a
sink-hole, and has to make a crosscountry trek to Erotia, the American
colony. Along the way he encounters
botanist Patricia Burlingame, the first
woman born on Venus, who accuses
him of poaching in the British
territories. Her home is also destroyed,
this time by a wandering “dough pot”
predator, and she is forced to join him.
Their journey takes them across the
swampy Hotlands, into the more
hospitable Cool Country, then into
mountains along the edge of the Night
Side. They encounter more predators,
and eventually fall in love.
Following their marriage Ham and
Patricia explore the Night Side and
make first contact with hyper-intelligent
telepathic plants, which have no survival
instinct and say that they will be extinct
within a hundred years. Prolonged
exposure to their scent drains the
human’s will-power; they eventually
escape by accident. The subsequent fate
of the plants isn’t revealed.

The Planet of Doubt

Another Ham and Patricia story, this
time set on Uranus, where the second
expedition finds a mysterious habitable
world shrouded in fog which obstructs
sight and limits the usefulness of radio
and sound. They discover several plant
species and one type of animal, a
ferocious creature resembling a “train”
of linked giant caterpillars.
Patricia is separated from the other
explorers, but is eventually found,
trapped in a closed loop of caterpillars,
and rescued in time for the explorers to
take off before their launch window is
lost. Discussing their adventures, they
conclude that the caterpillars are the
young of a flying species, never seen
properly, which are probably the most
important inhabitants of Uranus.
Continued next page

“But Tweel hung on to some of my words. He remembered a
couple of them, which I suppose is a great achievement if you’re
used to a language you have to make up as you go along. But I
couldn’t get the hang of his talk; either I missed some subtle
point or we just didn’t think alike—and I rather believe the latter
view.
“I’ve other reasons for believing that. After a while I gave up
the language business, and tried mathematics. I scratched two
plus two equals four on the ground, and demonstrated it with
pebbles. Again Tweel caught the idea, and informed me that
three plus three equals six. Once more we seemed to be getting
somewhere.
“So, knowing that Tweel had at least a grammar school
education, I drew a circle for the sun, pointing first at it, and
then at the last glow of the sun. Then I sketched in Mercury, and
Venus, and Mother Earth, and Mars, and finally, pointing to
Mars, I swept my hand around in a sort of inclusive gesture to
indicate that Mars was our current environment. I was working
up to putting over the idea that my home was on the earth.
“Tweel understood my diagram all right. He poked his beak
at it, and with a great deal of trilling and clucking, he added
Deimos and Phobos to Mars, and then sketched in the earth’s
moon!
“Do you see what that proves? It proves that Tweel’s race
uses telescopes—that they’re civilized!”
“Does not!” snapped Harrison. “The moon is visible from
here as a fifth magnitude star. They could see its revolution with
the naked eye.”
“The moon, yes!” said Jarvis. “You’ve missed my point.
Mercury isn’t visible! And Tweel knew of Mercury because he
placed the Moon at the third planet, not the second. If he didn’t
know Mercury, he’d put the earth second, and Mars third,
instead of fourth! See?”
“Humph!” said Harrison.
“Anyway,” proceeded Jarvis, “I went on with my lesson.
Things were going smoothly, and it looked as if I could put the
idea over. I pointed at the earth on my diagram, and then at
myself, and then, to clinch it, I pointed to myself and then to
the earth itself shining bright green almost at the zenith.
“Tweel set up such an excited clacking that I was certain he
understood. He jumped up and down, and suddenly he pointed
at himself and then at the sky, and then at himself and at the sky
again. He pointed at his middle and then at Arcturus, at his head
and then at Spica, at his feet and then at half a dozen stars, while
I just gaped at him. Then, all of a sudden, he gave a tremendous
leap. Man, what a hop! He shot straight up into the starlight,
seventy-five feet if an inch! I saw him silhouetted against the sky,

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 6 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

saw him turn and come down at me head first, and land smack
on his beak like a javelin! There he stuck square in the center of
my sun-circle in the sand—a bull’s eye!”
“Nuts!” observed the captain. “Plain nuts!”
“That’s what I thought, too! I just stared at him
openmouthed while he pulled his head out of the sand and
stood up. Then I figured he’d missed my point, and I went
through the whole blamed rigmarole again, and it ended the
same way, with Tweel on his nose in the middle of my picture!”
“Maybe it’s a religious rite,” suggested Harrison.
“Maybe,” said Jarvis dubiously. “Well, there we were. We
could exchange ideas up to a certain point, and then—blooey!
Something in us was different, unrelated; I don’t doubt that
Tweel thought me just as screwy as I thought him. Our minds
simply looked at the world from different viewpoints, and
perhaps his viewpoint is as true as ours. But—we couldn’t get
together, that’s all. Yet, in spite of all difficulties, I liked Tweel,
and I have a queer certainty that he liked me.”
“Nuts!” repeated the captain. “Just daffy!”
“Yeah? Wait and see. A couple of times I’ve thought that
perhaps we—” He paused, and then resumed his narrative.
“Anyway, I finally gave it up, and got into my thermo-skin to
sleep. The fire hadn’t kept me any too warm, but that damned
sleeping bag did. Got stuffy five minutes after I closed myself in.
I opened it a little and bingo! Some eighty-below-zero air hit my
nose, and that’s when I got this pleasant little frostbite to add to
the bump I acquired during the crash of my rocket.
“I don’t know what Tweel made of my sleeping. He sat
around, but when I woke up, he was gone. I’d just crawled out
of my bag, though, when I heard some twittering, and there he
came, sailing down from that three-story Thyle cliff to alight on
his beak beside me. I pointed to myself and toward the north,
and he pointed at himself and toward the south, and when I
loaded up and started away, he came along.
“Man, how he ravelled! A hundred and fifty feet at a jump,
sailing through the air stretched out like a spear, and landing on
his beak. He seemed surprised at my plodding, but after a few
moments he fell in beside me, only every few minutes he’d go
into one of his leaps, and stick his nose into the sand a block
ahead of me. Then he’d come shooting back at me; it made me
nervous at first to see that beak of his coming at me like a spear,
but he always ended in the sand at my side.
“So the two of us plugged along across the Mare Chronium.
Same sort of place as this—same crazy plants and same little
green biopods growing in the sand, or crawling out of your way.
We talked—not that we understood each other, you know, but
just for company. I sang songs, and I suspected Tweel did too;

The Red Peri

The pirate ship Red Peri intercepts and
robs the Interplanetary freighter Aardkin
as it is approaching Earth, annoying its
pilot, Frank Keene. A year later a twoman scientific ship piloted by Keene is
forced to make an emergency landing on
Pluto, only to discover that it has
accidentally landed near the pirate base.
Keene and his companion are taken
prisoner, and discover that the pirate
captain (also known as Red Peri; it isn’t
clear if Peri is her real name) is an
attractive young woman. Pluto is revealed
to have dangerous mineral life forms
which digest metals, carbon, etc. After
saving the pirate captain from a swarm of
Carbon Eaters, Keene begins to fall in
love with her, but is determined to
capture her. He learns that she is
following in her father’s footsteps,
seeking revenge for the theft of patents
stolen by Interplanetary, the company
that controls most commercial space
travel, ship construction, etc.
Keene discovers a way to escape from
the base without a space suit, surviving in
vacuum for nearly a minute, and
recaptures his own ship. He takes Red
Peri with him as his prisoner. The pirate
ship catches up with them, but Keene
uses her as a hostage. She admits that she
is afraid of execution, and Keene realises
that he wants to force her to give up her
career, rather than handing her over to
the authorities. Before he tells her she
makes a daring escape, leaving Keene en
route for Saturn and empty-handed. The
story ends with Keene determined to
meet her again, and certain that he will
do so if he takes a job with Interplanetary
and becomes a target for her pitates.1
1

This open ending and similarities between
The Red Peri and The Black Flame
(relationships between the main characters,
design of spacecraft, etc.) suggest that the
latter may have been begun as a sequel to
The Red Peri, but the final result is very
different and not part of the Planetary
sequence.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 7 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Continued next page

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

The Mad Moon

Grant Calthorpe loses his fortune in the
crash of 2110 and becomes a trader on
Jupiter’s moon Io, where the degenerate
“Loonies” trade medicinal Farva leaves
for chocolate. There is a second native
race, the tiny hostile Slinkers. While
suffering from fever he encounters
another human, the beautiful Lee Neilan,
victim of a plane crash, who he believes is
a hallucination; she is also ill and makes
the same mistake. Later he finds her and
rescues her from a slinker attack, but the
slinkers then invade Calthorpe’s cabin
and they are forced to flee to the
mountains. There they discover an
abandoned city, the last remains of a
once-great Loonie civilisation. Calthorpe
uses a flame pistol to kill the slinkers, and
its blast attracts the attention of a rescue
ship. The story ends with Neilan’s father
offering Calthorpe a better job, and the
engagement of Calthorpe and Neilan.

Redemption Cairn

Pilot Jack Sands is blamed for the crash
of a returning expedition to Europa; the
co-pilot Kratska is actually responsible,
but framed Sands then disappeared.
Sands is branded a coward and unable to
find work. Months later he is hired to
pilot another expedition to Europa – his
co-pilot is Claire Avery, winner of a
prestigious race but actually a poor pilot
who won largely through luck.
It emerges that the second expedition
is looking for papers left by the captain of
the earlier expedition, who discovered
how to use protactinium (a radioactive
element that is only found in quantity on
Europa) to fuel atomic blast engines that
will be much more powerful than those in
current use. But the expedition’s biologist
is actually the disguised Kraska; he
kidnaps Avery and attacks the others
aboard the ship, planning to force Avery
to fly him back to Earth with the
formula. Sands finds a way to catch up
with them and kills Kratska, but is
seriously injured; Avery then successfully
flies the ship to Io and lands perfectly.
Continued next page

at least, some of his trillings and twitterings had a subtle sort
of rhythm.
“Then, for variety, Tweel would display his smattering of
English words. He’d point to an outcropping and say ‘rock,’
and point to a pebble and say it again; or he’d touch my arm
and say ‘Tick,’ and then repeat it. He seemed terrifically
amused that the same word meant the same thing twice in
succession, or that the same word could apply to two different
objects. It set me wondering if perhaps his language wasn’t like
the primitive speech of some earth people—you know,
Captain, like the Negritoes, for instance, who haven’t any
generic words. No word for food or water or man—words for
good food and bad food, or rainwater and seawater, or strong
man and weak man—but no names for general classes. They’re
too primitive to understand that rain water and sea water are
just different aspects of the same thing. But that wasn’t the
case with Tweel; it was just that we were somehow
mysteriously different—our minds were alien to each other.
And yet—we liked each other!”
“Looney, that’s all,” remarked Harrison. “That’s why you
two were so fond of each other.”
“Well, I like you!” countered Jarvis wickedly. “Anyway,”
he resumed, “don’t get the idea that there was anything
screwy about Tweel. In fact, I’m not so sure but that he
couldn’t teach our highly praised human intelligence a trick or
two. Oh, he wasn’t an intellectual superman, I guess; but
don’t overlook the point that he managed to understand a
little of my mental workings, and I never even got a
glimmering of his.”
“Because he didn’t have any!” suggested the captain, while
Putz and Leroy blinked attentively.
“You can judge of that when I’m through,” said Jarvis.
“Well, we plugged along across the Mare Chronium all that
day, and all the next. Mare Chronium—Sea of Time! Say, I
was willing to agree with Schiaparelli’s name by the end of that
march! Just that gray, endless plain of weird plants, and never
a sign of any other life. It was so monotonous that I was even
glad to see the desert of Xanthus toward the evening of the
second day.
“I was fair worn out, but Tweel seemed as fresh as ever, for
all I never saw him drink or eat. I think he could have crossed
the Mare Chronium in a couple of hours with those block-long
nose dives of his, but he stuck along with me. I offered him
some water once or twice; he took the cup from me and
sucked the liquid into his beak, and then carefully squirted it
all back into the cup and gravely returned it.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 8 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

“Just as we sighted Xanthus, or the cliffs that bounded it, one
of those nasty sand clouds blew along, not as bad as the one we
had here, but mean to travel against. I pulled the transparent
flap of my thermo-skin bag across my face and managed pretty
well, and I noticed that Tweel used some feathery appendages
growing like a mustache at the base of his beak to cover his
nostrils, and some similar fuzz to shield his eyes.”
“He is a desert creature!” ejaculated the little biologist,
Leroy.
“Huh? Why?”
“He drink no water—he is adapt’ for sand storm—”
“Proves nothing! There’s not enough water to waste
anywhere on this desiccated pill called Mars. We’d call all of it
desert on earth, you know.” He paused. “Anyway, after the
sand storm blew over, a little wind kept blowing in our faces,
not strong enough to stir the sand. But suddenly things came
drifting along from the Xanthus cliffs—small, transparent
spheres, for all the world like glass tennis balls! But light—they
were almost light enough to float even in this thin air—empty,
too; at least, I cracked open a couple and nothing came out but
a bad smell. I asked Tweel about them, but all he said was ‘No,
no, no,’ which I took to mean that he knew nothing about
them. So they went bouncing by like tumbleweeds, or like soap
bubbles, and we plugged on toward Xanthus. Tweel pointed at
one of the crystal balls once and said ‘rock,’ but I was too tired
to argue with him. Later I discovered what he meant.
“We came to the bottom of the Xanthus cliffs finally, when
there wasn’t much daylight left. I decided to sleep on the
plateau if possible; anything dangerous, I reasoned, would be
more likely to prowl through the vegetation of the Mare
Chronium than the sand of Xanthus. Not that I’d seen a single
sign of menace, except the rope-armed black thing that had
trapped Tweel, and apparently that didn’t prowl at all, but lured
its victims within reach. It couldn’t lure me while I slept,
especially as Tweel didn’t seem to sleep at all, but simply sat
patiently around all night. I wondered how the creature had
managed to trap Tweel, but there wasn’t any way of asking him.
I found that out too, later; it’s devilish!
“However, we were ambling around the base of the Xanthus
barrier looking for an easy spot to climb. At least, I was. Tweel
could have leaped it easily, for the cliffs were lower than Thyle—
perhaps sixty feet. I found a place and started up, swearing at
the water tank strapped to my back—it didn’t bother me except
when climbing—and suddenly I heard a sound that I thought I
recognized!
“You know how deceptive sounds are in this thin air. A shot
sounds like the pop of a cork. But this sound was the drone of a

Tidal Moon

The final story of the sequence was
completed by Helen Weinbaum from two
pages of notes after her brother’s death.
Since this story’s copyright has not expired
in Europe it could not be included on the
Forgotten Futures site or the distribution
disk. It can be found on line via Project
Gutenberg Australia where its copyright has
ended.

Ganymede’s main export is Cree moss,
which can be processed to make the
valuable drug Crephine. Ben Amherst
collects it for Cree Inc., following a
route around the moon to settlements
where the natives grow the moss
(which is initially red in Ganymede’s
ammoniated atmosphere) and age it
underground to the blue form the
company needs. On one of his trips he
is accompanied by Kirt Scaler, allegedly
from Earth, who claims to be a tourist
and plans to stay at the village of
Aquia, where one of the company’s
traders is working on a process to turn
the moss blue artificially. During several
encounters with the native wildlife
Amherst begins to suspect that Scaler
knows much more than about
Ganymede than he pretends.
At Aquia Amherst discovers that
the trader, Carl Kent, has died in one
of the tidal floods that sweep the
planet, leaving his daughter Carol to
carry on in his place. Scaler begins to
woo Carol while the domed colony is
underwater, and Amherst becomes
increasingly jealous as he realises that
he loves her.
Eventually it becomes apparent that
Scaler is after the secret of Kent’s
process; Cree has been found growing
on Io, but doesn’t turn blue there.
Ionian Products will make a fortune and
glut the market if they can use Kent’s
process.
Scaler escapes with the formula, but
it turns out to be useless; the process
needs Ganymedan Gall-ant eggs, and
the ants can’t live or breed in Io’s
atmosphere, which has traces of
methane, not ammonia.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 9 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Timeline

Note: Dates in bold come from the stories.
Dates in italics are estimates.
Some
inconsistencies are discussed in the notes.
Circa 13000 BC
Martian civilization is at its height. A
Martian expedition visits Earth, and
the pre-Dynastic Egyptian culture
treats the explorers as gods. One is
remembered as Thoth.
Early 20th Century
Experiments with chemical rocketry
and nuclear power.
1993
Atomic blast perfected by Doheny.
2000
Cardoza expedition to the Moon.
2007
de Lancey expedition to Venus fails
catastrophically early in flight.
2010 onwards
Ares expedition reaches Mars; later
expeditions to Mars and Venus.
A Martian Odyssey, Valley of Dreams
2020
International Congress at Lisle
apportions the surface of Venus to
the nations that will eventually
colonise it. Despite this, colonisation
is very slow until the properties of
Xixtchil are discovered.
2040s-50s
Moons of Jupiter and Saturn
explored and colonized.
2053
First Pluto expedition
2059
Council of Berne decides that
explorers cannot claim entire planets
or moons, but only the areas actually
explored.
2060
First expedition to Uranus.
2071
First Red Peri attacks.
2076
Pacific War. Patricia Burlingame born
(first child of Venus colonists).
2083
Tidal Moon
Continued next page

rocket, and sure enough, there went our second auxiliary about
ten miles to westward, between me and the sunset!”
“Vas me!” said Putz. “I hunt for you.”
“Yeah; I knew that, but what good did it do me? I hung on
to the cliff and yelled and waved with one hand. Tweel saw it
too, and set up a trilling and twittering, leaping to the top of the
barrier and then high into the air. And while I watched, the
machine droned on into the shadows to the south.
“I scrambled to the top of the cliff. Tweel was still pointing
and trilling excitedly, shooting up toward the sky and coming
down head-on to stick upside down on his back in the sand. I
pointed toward the south, and at myself, and he said, ‘Yes—
Yes—Yes’; but somehow I gathered that he thought the flying
thing was a relative of mine, probably a parent. Perhaps I did his
intellect an injustice; I think now that I did.
“I was bitterly disappointed by the failure to attract attention.
I pulled out my thermo-skin and crawled into it, as the night
chill was already apparent. Tweel stuck his beak into the sand
and drew up his legs and arms and looked for all the world like
one of those leafless shrubs out there. I think he stayed that way
all night.”
“Protective mimicry!” ejaculated Leroy. “See? He is desert
creature!”
“In the morning,” resumed Jarvis, “we started off again. We
hadn’t gone a hundred yards into Xanthus when I saw something
queer! This is one thing Putz didn’t photograph, I’ll wager!
“There was a line of little pyramids—tiny ones, not more
than six inches high, stretching across Xanthus as far as I could
see! Little buildings made of pygmy bricks, they were, hollow
inside and truncated, or at least broken at the top and empty. I
pointed at them and said ‘What?’ to Tweel, but he gave some
negative twitters to indicate, I suppose, that he didn’t know. So
off we went, following the row of pyramids because they ran
north, and I was going north.
“Man, we trailed that line for hours! After a while, I noticed
another queer thing: they were getting larger. Same number of
bricks in each one, but the bricks were larger.
“By noon they were shoulder high. I looked into a couple—
all just the same, broken at the top and empty. I examined a
brick or two as well; they were silica, and old as creation itself!”
“How do you know?” asked Leroy.
“They were weathered—edges rounded. Silica doesn’t
weather easily even on earth, and in this climate—!”
“How old you think?”
“Fifty thousand—a hundred thousand years. How can I tell?
The little ones we saw in the morning were older—perhaps ten
times as old. Crumbling. How old would that make them? Half a

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 10 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

million years? Who knows?” Jarvis paused a moment. “Well,” he
resumed, “we followed the line. Tweel pointed at them and said
‘rock’ once or twice, but he’d done that many times before.
Besides, he was more or less right about these.
“I tried questioning him. I pointed at a pyramid and asked
‘People?’ and indicated the two of us. He set up a negative sort of
clucking and said, ‘No, no, no. No one—one—two. No two—
two—four,’ meanwhile rubbing his stomach. I just stared at him
and he went through the business again. ‘No one—one—two. No
two—two—four.’ I just gaped at him.”
“That proves it!” exclaimed Harrison. “Nuts!”
“You think so?” queried Jarvis sardonically. “Well, I figured it
out different! ‘No one—one—two!’ You don’t get it, of course, do
you?”
“Nope—nor do you!”
“I think I do! Tweel was using the few English words he knew to
put over a very complex idea. What, let me ask, does mathematics
make you think of?”
“Why—of astronomy. Or—or logic!”
“That’s it! ‘No one—one—two!’ Tweel was telling me that the
builders of the pyramids weren’t people—or that they weren’t
intelligent, that they weren’t reasoning creatures! Get it?”
“Huh! I’ll be damned!”
“You probably will.”
“Why,” put in Leroy, “he rub his belly?”
“Why? Because, my dear biologist, that’s where his brains are!
Not in his tiny head—in his middle!”
“C’est impossible!”
“Not on Mars, it isn’t! This flora and fauna aren’t earthly; your
biopods prove that!” Jarvis grinned and took up his narrative.
“Anyway, we plugged along across Xanthus and in about the
middle of the afternoon, something else queer happened. The
pyramids ended.”
“Ended!”
“Yeah; the queer part was that the last one—and now they
were ten-footers—was capped! See? Whatever built it was still
inside; we’d trailed ‘em from their half-million-year-old origin to
the present.
“Tweel and I noticed it about the same time. I yanked out my
automatic (I had a clip of Boland explosive bullets in it) and
Tweel, quick as a sleight-of-hand trick, snapped a queer little glass
revolver out of his bag. It was much like our weapons, except that
the grip was larger to accommodate his four-taloned hand. And
we held our weapons ready while we sneaked up along the lines of
empty pyramids.

Timeline (continued)

2086
The Red Peri
2098-9
Parasite Planet, The Lotus Eaters
2100
Second expedition to Uranus.
Planet of Doubt
2110
False expectations of a gold strike on
Venus cause the failure of the
Planetary Trading Corporation and a
stock market crash. The Gunderson
expedition to Europa crash-lands on
its return to Earth.
2111-12
Redemption Cairn
2112
Flight on Titan (or 2145, see below)
The Mad Moon
Notes
The dates for the atomic blast and Moon
landing are based on the chronology
mentioned in A Martian Odyssey.
A Martian Odyssey states that Venus
has not yet been colonized, but Parasite
Planet dates the partition of Venus at
2020, and The Red Peri states that
Venus has been colonised for more than
50 years. This suggests that Venus was
colonised between the date of the first
Mars landing and 2020. Assuming
roughly a decade of colonization puts
the Ares expedition at circa 2010.
Despite this early start colonisation of
Venus seems to have been slow, since
the first child of colonists wasn’t born
until the 2070s. A likely explanation is
repeated setbacks from disease and the
appalling climate, and no obvious
exports or benefits from a permanent
settlement at first. Things only took off
when the medical properties of Xixtchil
were discovered in the 2060s.
Exploitation of the outer planets was
evidently much faster, since there is a
thriving colony on Ganymede in 2083
(Tidal Moon).
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 11 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

The medical properties of Kree
moss must have been discovered early,
giving a powerful incentive for
exploitation. However, it should be
remembered that Tidal Moon is the
least canonical of these stories, since it
was largely written after Stanley
Weinbaum’s death.
Flight on Titan gives later dates for
the lunar landing and gold crisis, states
that Martian civilization is dead, names
a different pilot for the moon landing,
and describes the discovery of an
archaeological site mentioned in The
Lotus Eaters, which is set earlier. For
simplicity these variations have been
ignored.
Wikipedia dates The Red Peri at
2083, 150 years after the first flight
over Mount Everest (the anniversary is
mentioned), but this may be an
approximation, not an exact figure; the
story is set after a conjunction of Saturn
and Pluto, and there was a prior
landing on Pluto which must have
occurred at a previous conjunction.
Conjunctions occur in 2053, 2085
and 2118; assuming a first landing in
2053, a date circa 2086 seems most
likely. However, there are numerous
discrepancies in the handling of
conjunctions in these stories, and
readers should go with whichever date
seems most appropriate for their needs.
The “now” of adventures etc. is
circa 2115 AD, a few years after the
events of the stories (if the
discrepancies in Flight on Titan are
ignored); this allows many canon
characters to appear in adventures. For
example, in 2115:
“Red Peri” Maclane is about 481
“Ham” Hammond is about 442
Patricia Hammond is about 392
Grant Calthorpe is about 273
Lee Neilan is about 223
Jack Sands is about 304
Claire Avery is about 274
1
2
3
4

The Red Peri
Parasite Planet, The Lotus Eaters
The Mad Moon
Redemption Cairn

“Tweel saw the movement first. The top tiers of bricks were
heaving, shaking, and suddenly slid down the sides with a thin
crash. And then—something—something was coming out!
“A long, silvery-gray arm appeared, dragging after it an
armoured body. Armored, I mean, with scales, silver-gray and
dull-shining. The arm heaved the body out of the hole; the
beast crashed to the sand.
“It was a nondescript creature—body like a big gray cask,
arm and a sort of mouth-hole at one end; stiff, pointed tail at
the other—and that’s all. No other limbs, no eyes, ears, nose—
nothing! The thing dragged itself a few yards, inserted its
pointed tail in the sand, pushed itself upright, and just sat.
“Tweel and I watched it for ten minutes before it moved.
Then, with a creaking and rustling like—oh, like crumpling stiff
paper—its arm moved to the mouth-hole and out came a brick!
The arm placed the brick carefully on the ground, and the thing
was still again.
“Another ten minutes—another brick. Just one of Nature’s
bricklayers. I was about to slip away and move on when Tweel
pointed at the thing and said ‘rock’! I went ‘huh?’ and he said it
again. Then, to the accompaniment of some of his trilling, he
said, ‘No—no—‘ and gave two or three whistling breaths.
“Well, I got his meaning, for a wonder! I said, ‘No breathe!’
and demonstrated the word. Tweel was ecstatic; he said, ‘Yes,
yes, yes! No, no, no breet!’ Then he gave a leap and sailed out
to land on his nose about one pace from the monster!
“I was startled, you can imagine! The arm was going up for a
brick, and I expected to see Tweel caught and mangled, but—
nothing happened! Tweel pounded on the creature, and the
arm took the brick and placed it neatly beside the first. Tweel
rapped on its body again, and said ‘rock,’ and I got up nerve
enough to take a look myself.
“Tweel was right again. The creature was rock, and it didn’t
breathe!”
“How you know?” snapped Leroy, his black eyes blazing
interest.
“Because I’m a chemist. The beast was made of silica! There
must have been pure silicon in the sand, and it lived on that.
Get it? We, and Tweel, and those plants out there, and even
the biopods are carbon life; this thing lived by a different set of
chemical reactions. It was silicon life!”
“La vie silicieuse!” shouted Leroy. “I have suspect, and now
it is proof! I must go see! Il faut que je—”
“All right! All right!” said Jarvis. “You can go see. Anyhow,
there the thing was, alive and yet not alive, moving every ten
minutes, and then only to remove a brick. Those bricks were its
waste matter. See, Frenchy? We’re carbon, and our waste is

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 12 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

carbon dioxide, and this thing is silicon and its waste is silicon
dioxide—silica. But silica is a solid, hence the bricks. And it builds
itself in, and when it is covered, it moves over to a fresh place to
start over. No wonder it creaked! A living creature a half a million
years old!”
“How you know how old?” Leroy was frantic.
“We trailed its pyramids from the beginning, didn’t we? If this
weren’t the original pyramid builder, the series would have ended
somewhere before we found him, wouldn’t it?—ended and started
over with the small ones. That’s simple enough, isn’t it?
“But he reproduces, or tries to. Before the third brick came out,
there was a little rustle and out popped a whole stream of those
little crystal balls. They’re his spores, or seeds—call ‘em what you
want. They went bouncing by across Xanthus just as they’d
bounced by us back in the Mare Chronium. I’ve a hunch how they
work, too—this is for your information, Leroy. I think the crystal
shell of silica is no more than protective covering, like an eggshell,
and that the active principle is the smell inside. It’s some sort of gas
that attacks silicon, and if the shell is broken near a supply of that
element, some reaction starts that ultimately develops into a beast
like that one.”
“You should try!” exclaimed the little Frenchman. “We must
break one to see!”
“Yeah? Well, I did. I smashed a couple against the sand. Would
you like to come back in about ten thousand years to see if I
planted some pyramid monsters? You’d most likely be able to tell
by that time!” Jarvis paused and drew a deep breath. “Lord! That
queer creature Do you picture it? Blind, deaf, nerveless, brainless—
just a mechanism, and yet—immortal! Bound to go on making
bricks, building pyramids, as long as silicon and oxygen exist, and
even afterwards it’ll just stop. It won’t be dead. If the accidents of
a million years bring it its food again, there it’ll be, ready to run
again, while brains and civilizations are part of the past. A queer
beast—yet I met a stranger one!”
“If you did, it must have been in your dreams!” growled
Harrison.
“You’re right!” said Jarvis soberly. “In a way, you’re right. The
dream-beast! That’s the best name for it—and it’s the most
fiendish, terrifying creation one could imagine! More dangerous
than a lion, more insidious than a snake!”
“Tell me!” begged Leroy. “I must go see!”
“Not this devil!” He paused again. “Well,” he resumed, “Tweel
and I left the pyramid creature and plowed along through Xanthus.
I was tired and a little disheartened by Putz’s failure to pick me up,
and Tweel’s trilling got on my nerves, as did his flying nosedives.
So I just strode along without a word, hour after hour across that
monotonous desert.

(Slightly) Weird Science

These stories were written in the
1930s, when the nebular hypothesis,
the idea that the sun and planets
formed by gradual accretion of gas and
dust particles, had temporarily fallen
out of favour. The universe was
believed to be too young for planets to
have formed that way. Solar systems
were considered rare, unlikely to form
without outside influences.
The theory then in vogue, used by
many SF authors of the period, was the
near collision hypothesis. It assumed a
catastrophic origin for planets, in which
another star passed close to the Sun,
tidal forces deforming the Sun’s
atmosphere so much that streams of
gas escaped its gravity, condensed as
dense clouds of matter and eventually
formed the planets. This took a few
thousand years rather than the billion
or so predicted by early versions of the
nebular hypothesis.

While the main consequence of this
process is rapid planet formation, a side
effect is a more even distribution of
elements through the Solar System than
predicted by the nebular hypothesis;
each of the separate clouds contained a
mix of elements, so the outer worlds
contain more metal and heavy elements
than in the nebular hypothesis.
As a result of the speed of this
process, gas giants still radiate internal
heat, warming their moons sufficiently
for them to be more or less habitable,
and there are radioactive materials and
other metals on their moons. Gravity of
most moons is comparatively high due
to the presence of heavy metals.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 13 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Continued next page

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Conditions on the worlds and moons
described conform to the leading
astronomical theories of the time; in
particular:
• Mercury was believed to be tidally
locked to the Sun; although no
stories are set there this is assumed
to be the case for game purposes.
• Weinbaum states that Venus is also
locked to the Sun, with mountains
high enough to be visible above its
eternal cloud cover; this theory,
based on faulty observations,
received publicity at the time.
• Mars was, of course, famous for
the “canals” that Lowell and others
believed that they’d seen there.
• As already noted, the gas giants
were believed to retain a good deal
of internal heat, enough to warm
their
moons
to
habitable
temperatures. Their nature wasn’t
entirely clear, and it was thought
there might be an accessible solid
surfaces.
• Finally, Pluto was initially thought
to be a comparatively large dense
world, whose gravity was strong
enough to have perturbed the orbit
of Neptune.
Nuclear processes work differently in
this setting. Radioactive rays cause the
atomic nucleus to break down,
releasing huge amounts of energy. The
more powerful the radioactive source,
the heavier the elements it can break
down1. This is a controllable process,
making atomic rocket engines possible.
Their exhaust is hot and immensely
destructive, but doesn’t appear to be
dangerously radioactive.
Atomic bombs use a more
destructive reaction which breaks down
the radioactive material itself.
Nuclear materials are surprisingly
stable. For example, commercially
viable deposits of protactinium exist
naturally on Europa; in our universe
most of its isotopes are extremely
unstable and it is only found in traces, a
decay product of uranium.
1

Redemption Cairn

“Toward mid-afternoon we came in sight of a low dark line
on the horizon. I knew what it was. It was a canal; I’d crossed it
in the rocket and it meant that we were just one-third of the way
across Xanthus. Pleasant thought, wasn’t it? And still, I was
keeping up to schedule.
“We approached the canal slowly; I remembered that this
one was bordered by a wide fringe of vegetation and that
Mudheap City was on it.
“I was tired, as I said. I kept thinking of a good hot meal, and
then from that I jumped to reflections of how nice and homelike even Borneo would seem after this crazy planet, and from
that, to thoughts of little old New York, and then to thinking
about a girl I know there, Fancy Long. Know her?”
“Vision entertainer,” said Harrison. “I’ve tuned her in. Nice
blonde—dances and sings on the Yerba Mate hour.”
“That’s her,” said Jarvis ungrammatically. “I know her pretty
well—just friends, get me?—though she came down to see us off
in the Ares. Well, I was thinking about her, feeling pretty
lonesome, and all the time we were approaching that line of
rubbery plants.
“And then—I said, ‘What ‘n Hell!’ and stared. And there she
was—Fancy Long, standing plain as day under one of those
crack-brained trees, and smiling and waving just the way I
remembered her when we left!”
“Now you’re nuts, too!” observed the captain.
“Boy, I almost agreed with you! I stared and pinched myself
and closed my eyes and then stared again—and every time,
there was Fancy Long smiling and waving! Tweel saw something,
too; he was trilling and clucking away, but I scarcely heard him.
I was bounding toward her over the sand, too amazed even to
ask myself questions.
“I wasn’t twenty feet from her when Tweel caught me with
one of his flying leaps. He grabbed my arm, yelling, ‘No—no—
no!’ in his squeaky voice. I tried to shake him off—he was as
light as if he were built of bamboo—but he dug his claws in and
yelled. And finally some sort of sanity returned to me and I
stopped less than ten feet from her. There she stood, looking as
solid as Putz’s head!”
“Vot?” said the engineer.
“She smiled and waved, and waved and smiled, and I stood
there dumb as Leroy, while Tweel squeaked and chattered. I
knew it couldn’t be real, yet—there she was!
“Finally I said, ‘Fancy! Fancy Long!’ She just kept on smiling
and waving, but looking as real as if I hadn’t left her thirty-seven
million miles away.
“Tweel had his glass pistol out, pointing it at her. I grabbed
his arm, but he tried to push me away. He pointed at her and

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 14 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

said, ‘No breet! No breet!’ and I understood that he meant that
the Fancy Long thing wasn’t alive.
“Man, my head was whirling!
“Still, it gave me the jitters to see him pointing his weapon at
her. I don’t know why I stood there watching him take careful aim,
but I did. Then he squeezed the handle of his weapon; there was a
little puff of steam, and Fancy Long was gone! And in her place
was one of those writhing, black rope-armed horrors like the one
I’d saved Tweel from!
“The dream-beast! I stood there dizzy, watching it die while
Tweel trilled and whistled. Finally he touched my arm, pointed at
the twisting thing, and said, ‘You one—one—two, he one—one—
two.’ After he’d repeated it eight or ten times, I got it. Do any of
you?”
“Oui,” shrilled Leroy. “Moi—je le comprends! He mean you
think of something, the beast he know, and you see it! Un chien—
a hungry dog, he would see the big bone with meat! Or smell it—
not?”
“Right!” said Jarvis. “The dream-beast uses its victim’s longings
and desires to trap its prey. The bird at nesting season would see its
mate, the fox, prowling for its own prey, would see a helpless
rabbit!”
“How he do?” queried Leroy.
“How do I know? How does a snake back on earth charm a bird
into its very jaws? And aren’t there deep-sea fish that lure their
victims into their mouths? Lord!” Jarvis shuddered. “Do you see
how insidious the monster is? We’re warned now—but henceforth
we can’t trust even our eyes. You might see me—I might see one
of you—and back of it may be nothing but another of those black
horrors!”
“How’d your friend know?” asked the captain abruptly.
“Tweel? I wonder! Perhaps he was thinking of something that
couldn’t possibly have interested me, and when I started to run, he
realized that I saw something different and was warned. Or perhaps
the dream-beast can only project a single vision, and Tweel saw
what I saw—or nothing. I couldn’t ask him. But it’s just another
proof that his intelligence is equal to ours or greater.”
“He’s daffy, I tell you!” said Harrison. “What makes you think
his intellect ranks with the human?”
“Plenty of things! First the pyramid-beast. He hadn’t seen one
before; he said as much. Yet he recognized it as a dead-alive
automaton of silicon.”
“He could have heard of it,” objected Harrison. “He lives
around here, you know.”
“Well how about the language? I couldn’t pick up a single idea
of his and he learned six or seven words of mine. And do you
realize what complex ideas he put over with no more than those six

Interplanetary Trade

Space travel is extremely expensive,
and every pound carried must earn the
maximum possible profit. Gold is barely
worth carrying – it’s expensive to ship
because of its weight, and so tempting
a target for piracy and theft that
insurance accounts for up to fifty
percent of profits1. One of the many
mysteries of the 2110 market crash is
why there was expected to be a useful
profit in gold from such an uncertain
source as Venus2. More money can be
made from gems, pharmaceuticals and
other biochemical material, and useful
radioactive ores. There is also a market
in Martian antiques and examples of
native craftsmanship such as Venusian
silver1.
Value isn’t guaranteed to remain
stable; for example, the first Titan
Flame-Orchid gem sold for half a
million dollars2. The next six made their
finder rich, but already prices were
starting to fall, and the trend is likely to
continue as more gems are imported.
Sooner or later it will be learned that
the colonists have found out how to
split the gems and culture them; within
weeks of the news getting out prices are
likely to plummet to a point where they
are barely worth shipping. If anyone
ever finds a way to duplicate the
process on Earth it’s likely that they will
lose their remaining value, and will be
treated as little more than costume
jewellery.
Similar trends must affect the prices
of imported biochemicals. Venusian
Xixtchil is a scarce product in high
demand3, and the traders who gather it
risk their lives. Its price is a reflection of
these
factors.
But
dozens
of
pharmaceutical companies must be
working on ways to grow the plant on
Earth or duplicate the active ingredients
synthetically. Eventually someone will
succeed, and the price of Xitchil will
inevitably fall considerably.
1
3

The Red Peri
Parasite Planet

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 15 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

2

Flight on Titan

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Technology

While space travel is the definitive
technology for this setting, it doesn’t exist
in isolation. Nuclear power is often
mentioned, and many other devices are
described in the stories. Some things that
we might expect in such a setting are
conspicuously absent; they may or may
not exist on Earth, they certainly don’t
seem to have found their way into space.
Definitely Exist: Atomic blasts, atomic
bombs, atomic power plants, space
travel, vacuum suits, radio (equipment
heavy, sometimes omitted from ships
to save weight), colour television1,
explosive
bullets,
heat
rays,
biotechnology (drugs derived from
alien plants and animals), infra-red
photography, robots2, radar3
Possibly Exist: Virtual reality4, flying cars,
a perfected radiation treatment for
cancer, valve and relay computers.
Unlikely to Exist: Transistors & integrated
circuits, spaceship autpilots, digital
cameras and small portable video
cameras5, communications satellites
(and other unmanned satellites), space
stations and other permanent space
settlements other than colonies on
planets and moons, orbital towers,
genetic engineering, lasers.
1
2

3

4

5

Possibly only available on Earth.
An ‘autobus’ with ‘robot driver’ appears in
Tidal Moon, but no other robots are
described. This is probably an automatic
control system, not an android.
The ‘Electric Plumb’ in Planet of Doubt
appears to be a radar altimeter, and ships
have meteor warning devices, but there is
no early warning of an approaching ship in
The Red Peri, and radar landing aids are not
used. Accuracy and range may be limited.
Weinbaum describes VR systems based on
film, drugs, and other technologies in two
stories outside this sequence, Pygmalion's
Spectacles and The Ideal. It seems plausible
that they also exist in the universe of the
‘Planetary’ sequence.
Photographic plates and film are still used
aboard expeditionary ships despite the
weight and inconvenience of carrying
processing equipment and chemicals.

or seven words? The pyramid monster—the dream-beast! In a
single phrase he told me that one was a harmless automaton and
the other a deadly hypnotist. What about that?”
“Huh!” said the captain.
“Huh if you wish! Could you have done it knowing only six
words of English? Could you go even further, as Tweel did, and
tell me that another creature was of a sort of intelligence so
different from ours that understanding was impossible—even
more impossible than that between Tweel and me?”
“Eh? What was that?”
“Later. The point I’m making is that Tweel and his race are
worthy of our friendship. Somewhere on Mars—and you’ll find
I’m right—is a civilization and culture equal to ours, and maybe
more than equal. And communication is possible between them
and us; Tweel proves that. It may take years of patient trial, for
their minds are alien, but less alien than the next minds we
encountered—if they are minds.”
“The next ones? What next ones?”
“The people of the mud cities along the canals.” Jarvis
frowned, then resumed his narrative. “I thought the dream-beast
and the silicon-monster were the strangest beings conceivable,
but I was wrong. These creatures are still more alien, less
understandable than either and far less comprehensible than
Tweel, with whom friendship is possible, and even, by patience
and concentration, the exchange of ideas.
“Well,” he continued, “we left the dream-beast dying,
dragging itself back into its hole, and we moved toward the
canal. There was a carpet of that queer walking-grass scampering
out of our way, and when we reached the bank, there was a
yellow trickle of water flowing. The mound city I’d noticed from
the rocket was a mile or so to the right and I was curious
enough to want to take a look at it.
“It had seemed deserted from my previous glimpse of its and
if any creatures were lurking in it—well, Tweel and I were both
armed. And by the way, that crystal weapon of Tweel’s was an
interesting device; I took a look at it after the dream-beast
episode. It fired a little glass splinter, poisoned, I suppose, and I
guess it held at least a hundred of ‘em to a load. The propellant
was steam—just plain steam!”
“Shteam!” echoed Putz. “From vot come, shteam?”
“From water, of course! You could see the water through the
transparent handle and about a gill of another liquid, thick and
yellowish. When Tweel squeezed the handle—there was no
trigger—a drop of water and a drop of the yellow stuff squirted
into the firing chamber, and the water vaporized—pop!—like
that. It’s not so difficult; I think we could develop the same
principle. Concentrated ravelled acid will heat water almost to

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 16 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

boiling, and so will quicklime, and there’s potassium and sodium—
“Of course, his weapon hadn’t the range of mine, but it wasn’t
so bad in this thin air, and it did hold as many shots as a cowboy’s
gun in a Western movie. It was effective, too, at least against
Martian life; I tried it out, aiming at one of the crazy plants, and
darned if the plant didn’t wither up and fall apart! That’s why I
think the glass splinters were poisoned.
“Anyway, we trudged along toward the mud-heap city and I
began to wonder whether the city builders dug the canals. I pointed
to the city and then at the canal, and Tweel said ‘No—no—no!’ and
gestured toward the south. I took it to mean that some other race
had created the canal system, perhaps Tweel’s people. I don’t
know; maybe there’s still another intelligent race on the planet, or a
dozen others. Mars is a queer little world.
“A hundred yards from the city we crossed a sort of road—just a
hard-packed mud trail, and then, all of a sudden, along came one of
the mound builders!
“Man, talk about fantastic beings! It looked rather like a barrel
trotting along on four legs with four other arms or tentacles. It had
no head, just body and members and a row of eyes completely
around it. The top end of the barrel-body was a diaphragm
stretched as tight as a drumhead, and that was all. It was pushing a
little coppery cart and tore right past us like the proverbial bat out
of Hell. It didn’t even notice us, although I thought the eyes on my
side shifted a little as it passed.
“A moment later another came along, pushing another empty
cart. Same thing—it just scooted past us. Well, I wasn’t going to be
ignored by a bunch of barrels playing train, so when the third one
approached, I planted myself in the way—ready to jump, of course,
if the thing didn’t stop.
“But it did. It stopped and set up a sort of drumming from the
diaphragm on top. And I held out both hands and said, ‘We are
friends!’ And what do you suppose the thing did?”
“Said, ‘Pleased to meet you,’ I’ll bet!” suggested Harrison.
“I couldn’t have been more surprised if it had! It drummed on its
diaphragm, and then suddenly boomed out, ‘We are v-r-r-riends’
and gave its pushcart a vicious poke at me! I jumped aside, and
away it went while I stared dumbly after it.
“A minute later another one came hurrying along. This one
didn’t pause, but simply drummed out, ‘We are v-r-r-riends!’ and
scurried by. How did it learn the phrase? Were all of the creatures
in some sort of communication with each other? Were they all parts
of some central organism? I don’t know, though I think Tweel does.
“Anyway, the creatures went sailing past us, every one greeting
us with the same statement. It got to be funny; I never thought to
find so many friends on this God-forsaken ball! Finally I made a

Glossary
Apogee Race: See Curry Cup
Atomic Blast: Atomic rocket engine; the
main engine(s) of a spaceship, also
called Afterjets.
AU: Astronomical Unit, the average
distance from the Earth to the Sun.
Auxilliary Rocket: Small craft carried by
exploratory ships such as the Ares, to
avoid the dangers of moving the ship
repeatedly. As atomic blasts improve
they have become uncommon.
Barrier: Range of high glaciers around
the rim of the night side of Venus.
Biopod: Martian organisms which
combine some of the characteristics
of Terran plants and animals.
Bladder Bird: Balloon-like animal found
on Europa.
Blancha: AKA “White Fever,” a disease
that affects visitors to Io.
Blanket Bat: Four-winged Ganymedan
flying predator which envelops its
prey then drains electrical energy
from the victim’s nervous system.
Blaster: Small atomic bomb.
Boland Bullet: Explosive bullet.
Conjunction: This term has several
meanings in astronomy; for the
purposes of this book it is when two
planets are on the same side of the
sun and closest to each other. See
later sections.
Crawler Crystals: Pluto’s living minerals,
named for the minerals they eat, e.g.
carbon feeders, sulphur feeders.
Cree: Medicinal moss of Ganymede.
Cree Inc.: Ganymedan company which
exports and processes Cree.
Crephine: Drug derived from Cree.
Curry Cup: An annual rocket race from
Earth, around the Moon, and back
to Earth. Won in 2111 by Claire
Avery, AKA “The Golden Flash.”
Dough-Pot: Venusian mobile fungus; a
deadly amorphous predator which
eats anything organic it encounters.
Electric Plumb: Radio echo finder; used
to measure a ship’s altitude.
Erotia: American settlement on Venus.
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 17 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey
Ferva Leaf: Plant found on Io which
produces a range of medically useful
alkaloid drugs.
Ferverin: Drug from Ferva leaves used to
combat the effects of Blancha.
Flame-Orchid: Thermoluminescent eggshaped gems found on Titan; they glow
in colours that vary with temperature
and are worth hundreds of thousands
of dollars.
Flame-Pistol: Guns which convert the bond
energy of industrial diamonds into
blasts of lightning-like energy and flame
a hundred yards long. They are clumsy
and slow to load, and the barrels
frequently burn out.
Fluorolux bulb: Low energy fluorescent
light bulb.
Floor Magnets: Magnetized floors in
spaceships, used to create the illusion
of gravity. The occupants wear shoes
containing steel plates.
Gamma Rorqual: Spear-tipped aquatic
predator of Ganymede.
Greater Eternities: 50-mile high mountain
range separating the British and
American territories on Venus.
Herapolis: City on Io.
Hex, Hexylamine: A synthetic narcotic.
The name is misleading; pure
hexylamine is actually highly toxic, the
drug is a hexylamine derivative.
Hipp: Hippocampus Catamiti. The “Seahorse” of Ganymede, tamed and used
as a riding animal by the natives and by
human colonists.
Hydropole:
South
polar
city
of
Ganymede; the only part of the planet
that isn’t affected by tidal floods raised
by Jupiter’s gravity.
Ice-Ant: Small three-legged animals of
Titan which melt and live in bubbles in
the ice. They are semi-intelligent and
make use of primitive tools.
Interplanetary: The main space travel
consortium, accused of patent theft by
the so-called Red Peri.
Ionian Products: Io’s main export
company.
Junopolis: Colonial capital of Io.
Continued next page

puzzled gesture to Tweel; I guess he understood, for he said,
‘One-one-two—yes!—Two-two-four—no!’ Get it?”
“Sure,” said Harrison. “It’s a Martian nursery rhyme.”
“Yeah! Well, I was getting used to Tweel’s symbolism, and I
figured it out this way. ‘One-one-two—yes!’ The creatures were
intelligent. ‘Two-two-four—no!’ Their intelligence was not of our
order, but something different and beyond the logic of two and
two is four. Maybe I missed his meaning. Perhaps he meant that
their minds were of low degree, able to figure out the simple
things—‘One-one-two—yes!—but not more difficult things—
Two-two-four—no!’ But I think from what we saw later that he
meant the other.
“After a few moments, the creatures came rushing back—first
one, then another. Their pushcarts were full of stones, sand,
chunks of rubbery plants, and such rubbish as that. They droned
out their friendly greeting, which didn’t really sound so friendly,
and dashed on. The third one I assumed to be my first
acquaintance and I decided to have another chat with him. I
stepped into his path again and waited.
“Up he came, booming out his ‘We are v-r-r-riends’ and
stopped. I looked at him; four or five of his eyes looked at me.
He tried his password again and gave a shove on his cart, but I
stood firm. And then the—the dashed creature reached out one
of his arms, and two finger-like nippers tweaked my nose!”
“Haw!” roared Harrison. “Maybe the things have a sense of
beauty!”
“Laugh!” grumbled Jarvis. “I’d already had a nasty bump and
a mean frostbite on that nose. Anyway, I yelled ‘Ouch!’ and
jumped aside and the creature dashed away; but from then on,
their greeting was ‘We are v-r-r-riends! Ouch!’ Queer beasts!
“Tweel and I followed the road squarely up to the nearest
mound. The creatures were coming and going, paying us not the
slightest attention, fetching their loads of rubbish. The road
simply dived into an opening, and slanted down like an old
mine, and in and out darted the barrel-people, greeting us with
their eternal phrase.
“I looked in; there was a light somewhere below, and I was
curious to see it. It didn’t look like a flame or torch, you
understand, but more like a civilized light, and I thought that I
might get some clue as to the creatures’ development. So in I
went and Tweel tagged along, not without a few trills and
twitters, however.
“The light was curious; it sputtered and flared like an old arc
light, but came from a single black rod set in the wall of the
corridor. It was electric, beyond doubt. The creatures were fairly
civilized, apparently.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 18 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

“Then I saw another light shining on something that glittered
and I went on to look at that, but it was only a heap of shiny sand.
I turned toward the entrance to leave, and the Devil take me if it
wasn’t gone!
“I supposed the corridor had curved, or I’d stepped into a side
passage. Anyway, I walked back in that direction I thought we’d
come, and all I saw was more dimlit corridor. The place was a
labyrinth! There was nothing but twisting passages running every
way, lit by occasional lights, and now and then a creature running
by, sometimes with a pushcart, sometimes without.
“Well, I wasn’t much worried at first. Tweel and I had only
come a few steps from the entrance. But every move we made
after that seemed to get us in deeper. Finally I tried following one
of the creatures with an empty cart, thinking that he’d be going
out for his rubbish, but he ran around aimlessly, into one passage
and out another. When he started dashing around a pillar like one
of these Japanese waltzing mice, I gave up, dumped my water tank
on the floor, and sat down.
“Tweel was as lost as I. I pointed up and he said ‘No—no—no!’
in a sort of helpless trill. And we couldn’t get any help from the
natives. They paid no attention at all, except to assure us they were
friends—ouch!
“Lord! I don’t know how many hours or days we wandered
around there! I slept twice from sheer exhaustion; Tweel never
seemed to need sleep. We tried following only the upward
corridors, but they’d run uphill a ways and then curve downwards.
The temperature in that damned ant hill was constant; you
couldn’t tell night from day and after my first sleep I didn’t know
whether I’d slept one hour or thirteen, so I couldn’t tell from my
watch whether it was midnight or noon.
“We saw plenty of strange things. There were machines running
in some of the corridors, but they didn’t seem to be doing
anything—just wheels turning. And several times I saw two barrelbeasts with a little one growing between them, joined to both.”
“Parthenogenesis!” exulted Leroy. “Parthenogenesis by budding
like les tulipes!”
“If you say so, Frenchy,” agreed Jarvis. “The things never
noticed us at all, except, as I say, to greet us with ‘We are v-r-rriends! Ouch!’ They seemed to have no home-life of any sort, but
just scurried around with their pushcarts, bringing in rubbish. And
finally I discovered what they did with it.
“We’d had a little luck with a corridor, one that slanted
upwards for a great distance. I was feeling that we ought to be
close to the surface when suddenly the passage debouched into a
domed chamber, the only one we’d seen. And man!—I felt like
dancing when I saw what looked like daylight through a crevice in
the roof.

Knife-Kite: Predatory bird of Titan
which flies at 100 MPH and impales
prey on its rapier-sharp beak.
Land Leet: Land-dwelling octopus-like
animal of Ganymede. Edible by
humans, considered “good eating.”
Leveling Poles: Graduated poles erected
around a rocket landing field to give
pilots an indication of height and
attitude.
Libration: The “wobble” of tidally
locked worlds and moons which
makes the primary move in the sky.
Loonie: Native of Io.
Mound Builder: Underground-dwelling
hive race of Mars.
Nivia: Colonial capital of Titan. Often
described as the “City of Snow.”
Nympus: Native of Ganymede.
Opposition: The time at which two
worlds are at their furthest distance
apart, on opposite sides of the Sun.
Parcat: Talking animal found on Io; a
common pet of the colonists.
P.T.C.: Planetary Trading Corporation,
whose failure caused the financial
crash of 2110.
Rectifier: Air purifier.
Red Peri, The: (1) The pirate ship of
that name; (2) its first captain, ‘Red’
Perry Maclane; (3) its second
captain, his daughter. She is
repeatedly called ‘Peri’ but it is
never confirmed as her real name.
Sillicellu: Plastic used for vacuum suit
visors.
Slinker: Semi-intelligent species of Io;
viciously aggressive ratlike creatures.
They may also live on Mars.
Terminator: On tidally locked worlds
such as Mercury and Venus, the
twilight region between the day side
and night side. On Venus this is the
only region inhabitable by humans,
who still need protective clothing in
many areas.
Thermide: Water purification pill which
uses a chemical process to boil water
and kill fungal spores and bacteria.
The pills are essential for survival in
the Venus Hotlands.
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 19 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey
Thermoid Expansion Chamber: An
essential safety component of the
Atomic Blast engine; the patent was
stolen by Interplanetary Corporation
lawyers, a direct cause of the original
Red Peri’s piratical career.
Thermo-Skin: Insulated sleeping bag.
Thoth: The ostrich-like intelligent race of
Mars.
“Top”: Fly a spaceship so that another
ship is “below” its engines and in
danger of being hit by the exhaust; a
common tactic of pirates such as Red
Peri.
Transkin: Protective rubbery over-suit
worn in the Hotlands of Venus.
Porous to allow the wearer to perspire
without letting spores in. Worn with a
filter mask and goggles to keep spores
out of the eyes and lungs.
Triops, Trioptes: Vicious semi-intelligent
predators found on the edges and
interior of the Dark Side of Venus;
they resemble Hotland Venusians but
have claws instead of pincers. Triops
noctivivans.
U-Bar: Spaceship attitude control yoke,
usually designed for dual pilots.
Uniped: A Venusian predator shaped like
a single-legged kangaroo with a long
spearlike beak.
Underjet: Secondary atomic blasts used
for takeoffs and landings. Depending
on the configuration of the ship they
may point aft with other engines, or at
ninety degrees to the main engines so
that the ship can land on its side (as in
the Gaea, the second ship to visit
Uranus).
Venoble: British colonial capital on
Venus.
‘Vision Set: TV.
Xixtchil: Venusian plant that can be
processed to make a rejuvenation drug
which prolongs virility but has no
effect on overall lifespan.
Yarkand: Chinese town, ruled by an
Ameer circa 2112.
Young’s Field: Rocket-port on Long
Island.

“There was a—a sort of machine in the chamber, just an
enormous wheel that turned slowly, and one of the creatures
was in the act of dumping his rubbish below it. The wheel
ground it with a crunch—sand, stones, plants, all into powder
that sifted away somewhere. While we watched, others filed in,
repeating the process, and that seemed to be all. No rhyme
nor reason to the whole thing—but that’s characteristic of this
crazy planet. And there was another fact that’s almost too
bizarre to believe.
“One of the creatures, having dumped his load, pushed his
cart aside with a crash and calmly shoved himself under the
wheel! I watched him being crushed, too stupefied to make a
sound, and a moment later, another followed him! They were
perfectly methodical about it, too; one of the cartless creatures
took the abandoned pushcart.
“Tweel didn’t seem surprised; I pointed out the next
suicide to him, and he just gave the most human-like shrug
imaginable, as much as to say, ‘What can I do about it?’ He
must have known more or less about these creatures.
“Then I saw something else. There was something beyond
the wheel, something shining on a sort of low pedestal. I
walked over; there was a little crystal, about the size of an egg,
fluorescing to beat Tophet. The light from it stung my hands
and face, almost like a static discharge, and then I noticed
another funny thing. Remember that wart I had on my left
thumb? Look!” Jarvis extended his hand. “It dried up and fell
off—just like that! And my abused nose—say, the pain went
out of it like magic! The thing had the property of hard x-rays
or gamma radiations, only more so; it destroyed diseased
tissue and left healthy tissue unharmed!
“I was thinking what a present that’d be to take back to
Mother Earth when a lot of racket interrupted. We dashed
back to the other side of the wheel in time to see one of the
pushcarts ground up. Some suicide had been careless, it seems.
“Then suddenly the creatures were booming and drumming
all around us and their noise was decidedly menacing. A
crowd of them advanced toward us; we backed out of what I
thought was the passage we’d entered by, and they came
rumbling after us, some pushing carts and some not. Crazy
brutes! There was a whole chorus of ‘We are v-r-r-riends!
Ouch!’ I didn’t like the ‘ouch’; it was rather suggestive.
“Tweel had his glass gun out and I dumped my water tank
for greater freedom and got mine. We backed up the corridor
with the barrel-beasts following—about twenty of them. Queer
thing—the ones coming in with loaded carts moved past us
inches away without a sign.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 20 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

“Tweel must have noticed that. Suddenly, he snatched out
that glowing coal cigar-lighter of his and touched a cartload of
plant limbs. Puff! The whole load was burning—and the crazy
beast pushing it went right along without a change of pace. It
created some disturbance among our ‘v-v-r-riends,’ however—
and then I noticed the smoke eddying and swirling past us, and
sure enough, there was the entrance!
“I grabbed Tweel and out we dashed and after us our
twenty pursuers. The daylight felt like Heaven, though I saw at
first glance that the sun was all but set, and that was bad, since
I couldn’t live outside my thermo-skin bag in a Martian night—
at least, without a fire.
“And things got worse in a hurry. They cornered us in an
angle between two mounds, and there we stood. I hadn’t fired
nor had Tweel; there wasn’t any use in irritating the brutes.
They stopped a little distance away and began their booming
about friendship and ouches.
“Then things got still worse! A barrel-brute came out with a
pushcart and they all grabbed into it and came out with
handfuls of foot-long copper darts—sharp-looking ones—and
all of a sudden one sailed past my ear—zing! And it was shoot
or die then.
“We were doing pretty well for a while. We picked off the
ones next to the pushcart and managed to keep the darts at a
minimum, but suddenly there was a thunderous booming of ‘vv-r-riends’ and ‘ouches,’ and a whole army of ‘em came out of
their hole.
“Man! We were through and I knew it! Then I realized that
Tweel wasn’t. He could have leaped the mound behind us as
easily as not. He was staying for me!
“Say, I could have cried if there’d been time! I’d liked
Tweel from the first, but whether I’d have had gratitude to do
what he was doing—suppose I had saved him from the first
dream-beast—he’d done as much for me, hadn’t he? I grabbed
his arm, and said ‘Tweel,’ and pointed up, and he understood.
He said, ‘No—no—no, Tick!’ and popped away with his glass
pistol.
“What could I do? I’d be a goner anyway when the sun set,
but I couldn’t explain that to him. I said, ‘Thanks, Tweel.
You’re a man!’ and felt that I wasn’t paying him any
compliment at all. A man! There are mighty few men who’d
do that.
“So I went ‘bang’ with my gun and Tweel went ‘puff’ with
his, and the barrels were throwing darts and getting ready to
rush us, and booming about being friends. I had given up
hope. Then suddenly an angel dropped right down from

About Forgotten Futures

Forgotten Futures is a shareware roleplaying game whose core rules material,
supplements, and adventures have been
published on disk and on line since
1993. Previous supplements were for the
most part based on Victorian and
Edwardian scientific romances and
fantasies, with FF X a licensed RPG based
on Tooth and Claw by Jo Walton, a
modern fantasy with a Victorian feel.
Two previous releases for the game
have included space travel:
FF II is based on Stories of Other
Worlds aka A Honeymoon in Space by
George Griffith, and involves antigravity
spaceships and a grand tour of an
inhabited Solar System, with humanoid
natives on Mars, Venus, Ganymede,
Saturn and the Moon. FF IX focuses on
weird science and gadgeteering, and
includes a race to the Moon with some
very odd contestants. While neither is
entirely compatible with the Solar System
described by Weinbaum, some elements
might make the transition with a little
work. Additionally, FF X includes an
optional change in setting that would give
Venus a race of intelligent dragons.
This supplement is distributed without
charge – if you find it useful and wish to
encourage the author to write more
please consider registering or purchasing
the Forgotten Futures CD-ROM; visit
www.forgottenfutures.co.uk and follow
the links to the game. A portion of the
earnings from the game is donated to
Cancer Research UK.
Some special rules are used for this
setting, discussed in later sections:
Linguist skill starts at zero for alien
languages regardless of MIND, e.g. a
character with MIND 4 might spend a
point to buy Linguist (German, French)
5, (Venusian) 1. This also applies to
aliens learning human languages.
Spaceship pilots need Pilot 6 or better
and must spend 2+ points on the skill
Spaceship navigators need a minimum
of Babbage Engine (Astrogator) 6

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 21 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ A Martian Odyssey

Heaven in the shape of Putz, with his underjets blasting the barrels into very small pieces!
“Wow! I let out a yell and dashed for the rocket; Putz opened the door and in I went, laughing and
crying and shouting! It was a moment or so before I remembered Tweel; I looked around in time to see
him rising in one of his nosedives over the mound and away.
“I had a devil of a job arguing Putz into following! By the time we got the rocket aloft, darkness was
down; you know how it comes here—like turning off a light. We sailed out over the desert and put down
once or twice. I yelled ‘Tweel!’ and yelled it a
hundred times, I guess. We couldn’t find him; he
could travel like the wind and all I got—or else I
imagined it—was a faint trilling and twittering
drifting out of the south. He’d gone, and damn it!
I wish—I wish he hadn’t!”
The four men of the Ares were silent—even
the sardonic Harrison. At last little Leroy broke
the stillness.
“I should like to see,” he murmured.
“Yeah,” said Harrison. “And the wart-cure.
Too bad you missed that; it might be the cancer
cure they’ve been hunting for a century and a
half.”
“Oh, that!” muttered Jarvis gloomily. “That’s
what started the fight!” He drew a glistening
object from his pocket.
Route taken by Jarvis and Tweel (J. Pez)
“Here it is.”

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 22 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

We wandered down the valley and I talked, talked about anything. I told her of the various forms life
assumed on the planets, how on Mars and Titan and Europa sex was unknown, though Venus and Earth
and Io all possessed it; and how on Mars and Europa vegetable and animal life had never differentiated,
so that even the vastly intelligent beaked Martians had a tinge of vegetable nature, while conversely the
song-bushes on the hills of Europa had a vaguely animal content…
Redemption Cairn
Strange how mistaken one can be, Amherst reflected. He could have sworn this man had been hardened
by such adventure as existed, nowadays, only on the planets.
Tidal Moon

Islands in the Sky

S

EVERAL hundred million years ago a small dense fast-moving star happened to pass
relatively close to the newly-formed Sun.

Astronomers disagree on the size of the other star and the distance of their closest
approach; all that can be stated with any certainty is that its gravitational influence was
sufficient to distort the Sun’s atmosphere and start to pull huge clouds of gas into space.
Some of the Sun’s atmosphere may have
transferred to the passing star, but most of
the clouds failed to escape and ended up
orbiting at various distances from the Sun.
Eventually they began to cool and combine,
forming progressively larger “clumps” of
matter which were slowly pulled together by
gravity. Over a few thousand years the first
protoplanets began to condense from the
clouds of debris, eventually forming the
worlds we know today.
Somewhere along the way something
went wrong with the formation of the fifth planet; the gravity of the largest protoplanet, later Jupiter,
may have simply ripped it apart through tidal forces. The debris became the Asteroid Belt between Mars
and Jupiter, comets, meteors, and other interplanetary rubble.
While the distribution of elements in the clouds started out even, lightweight gas molecules such as
hydrogen tended to be lost by the innermost planets as they cooled; driven outwards by light pressure,
they ended up in deeper space and were swept up by the gas giants. A small proportion of hydrogen

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 23 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Let Us Not Go There…

The ‘Planetary’ stories don’t detail every
world and moon in the Solar System;
some obvious omissions leave a lot of
scope for exploration. Brief noncanonical descriptions are provided in
the main text, referees should feel free to
make whatever changes they like:
Mercury isn’t mentioned in any story,
but it was believed to be tidally locked in
the 1930s. Comparison with the
descriptions of tidally-locked Venus
suggests it is uninhabitable; airless apart
from volcanic gases, searing heat right up
to the terminator, but only a little above
absolute zero on the dark side. There
may be mines and other facilities there,
but they are never described. That
doesn’t rule out life, of course, perhaps
mineral forms similar to the Martian
pyramid-builder or the feeder crystals of
Pluto.
We see almost nothing of Earth, and
The Moon is dismissed as “arid and
useless” in Flight on Titan, which also
mentions that there is no gold there, nor
any other heavy metals. But it’s a really
big moon; surely there must be
something worth such an easy trip. If
there aren’t heavy metals, what about
the light ones, and other light elements?
The Asteroids are mentioned in
passing, never described. While they’re
probably all airless, everything else that
goes to make up a world must be drifting
out there somewhere, including the
metals and minerals that are deep below
the ground on a normal world. There
ought to be some interesting possibilities
out there if adventurers are prepared to
risk the dangers of this region of space.
Finally, the major moons of Jupiter
and Saturn are colonised, and there are
landings on Uranus and Pluto, but
Neptune is never described. This may
simply be because it’s too cold and its
moons are too small to sustain life or
human colonies, but that shouldn’t stop
someone from taking a closer look
sooner or later.

remains, bound into water and other chemical compounds, most
has gone. Mercury lost almost all its atmosphere, while Venus,
Earth and Mars retained enough water and air to support human
life. In the case of Venus many areas are uninhabitable for other
reasons, for Mars a period of conditioning (or an oxygen mask)
is needed. The larger moons of Jupiter and Saturn also have
breathable atmospheres, as does Uranus. Finally, Pluto retained
its atmosphere, but cooled to only a few degrees above absolute
zero, and the “air” is now a mixture of frozen gases that must be
scooped up and melted before they can be breathed.

Adventure Idea: Frozen Fortress

For decades the pirate Red Peri operated from a base on Pluto, but the
secret was revealed when a prisoner escaped. It will be years before the
authorities can reach her there, but engines are improving and she’s
looking at alternatives. One she has already rejected is the dark side of
Mercury; there are too many problems with life support. But if she can
spread the idea that she’s based there it will divert attention from her
real plans.
In a few months a “sun-grazing” comet will pass within half a
million miles of Earth, heading towards Mercury. Attorneys for the
mysterious Rip Reed Foundation (an anagram of Red Peri; Rip Reed is
supposed to be a reclusive millionaire) hire the adventurers to fly to
the comet, land, survey it, take specimens from the surface and core
samples, and bring them back to Earth. They’re told that Reed hopes
to find evidence of the composition of the primordial Solar System in
the dissolved gasses and other materials of the comet.
The main complication is that getting to the comet will take a lot of
power – it’s moving fast. Flying there then decelerating, landing, and
heading straight back to Earth would take more fuel and supplies than
the adventurers’ ship can carry; it will be easier to follow the comet
around the Sun (and close to Mercury) then decelerate and refuel on
Venus before heading back to Earth. The attorneys “reluctantly” agree
to the additional expense and time. As instructed, of course.
There should also be a few complications on the comet; perhaps
there is some sort of life there, perhaps it’s just accompanied by
hundreds of icy meteors. But the adventurers should feel pleased with
their success as they prepare to land on Venus.
Unfortunately, their ship will then be attacked by the Red Peri, and
all records and samples will be taken. The pirates will make it obvious
that they’re especially interested in pictures of Mercury in general and
the dark side in particular, radio logs, and any other records that might
relate to Mercury. They might even say something about “pictures of
the base” if the adventurers seem sufficiently gullible.
“Luckily” the Foundation insured the mission, and in the end the
adventurers won’t lose much apart from time and their place in
scientific history (assuming that there had ever been a real intention to
publish their results). Working out who really hired them and why
should lead to some interesting adventures.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 24 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Planet

Distance from Sun
(astronomical units)

1
5

Mercury
Venus
Earth
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto

0.39
0.72
1.00
1.52
5.20
9.54
19.22
30.06
29.7 to 49.3 5

Distance1
from Earth
57 to 129
26 to 160
48 to 234
387 to 573
793 to 979
1,690 to 1,876
2,700 to 2,886
2,664 to 4,676

Day2

Year2

87.9 days
224.7 days
24 hours
24hr 37m
9hr 54m
10hr 41m
17 hr 14m
14 hours
20 hours

87.9 days
224.7 days
365.25 days
687 days
11.86 years
15 years
84 years
165 years
248 years

Surface
Gravity
0.4g
0.7g
1.0g
0.4g
2.5g
1.1g
0.9g
1.1g
1.2g

Atmosphere
Volcanic gases
Nitrogen / Oxygen
Nitrogen / Oxygen
Nitrogen / Oxygen 3
Hydrogen / Helium
Hydrogen / Helium
Argon / Oxygen
Helium / Oxygen ??
Neon / Oxygen4

2
3
4
Millions of miles
Earth hours, days or years
Low pressure, breathable with adaptation
Frozen
Closest to the Sun circa 1990 and 2238, most distant circa 2114. 44 AU in 2086, the date of The Red Peri

Every world is a different environment – for example, while the table above shows that Venus, Earth and
Mars all have Nitrogen / Oxygen atmospheres, conditions are very different. A Martian on Earth would
be too hot, and oppressed by what it would regard as hugely excessive pressure and gravity. A human
must spend weeks adapting to conditions on Mars, and will die without a filter mask and transkin on most
parts of Venus. The atmosphere of Pluto is breathable – if you can melt it! And there are huge extremes
of temperature, often on a single world. The brief descriptions that follow can’t hope to be more than a
glimpse of the other worlds; you are advised to refer to prime sources or visit them for yourself if you
want to learn more. The London Geological Museum and Natural History Museum and the Smithsonian
Institution all have excellent galleries on the explored worlds, and there are similar if smaller exhibits in
most major cities.

Mercury: Too Hot To Handle
The innermost and by far the hottest world of the Solar System, Mercury is
tidally locked to the Sun, with a bright face and a dark face. It has no
permanent atmosphere; gases are released by volcanic processes on the hot
side, and either escape into space or condense as solids or liquids on the dark
side of the planet. Mostly these gas traces are at very low pressures; a
hundredth of an atmosphere or less. Explorers generally consider them a
nuisance, since they tend to condense on cool objects such as space suits,
damaging visors and electrical equipment. The gas components can include
nitrogen and sulphur dioxides, sulphur vapour, etc.
While Mercury is a comparatively dense world and should in theory have useful deposits of heavy
metals, the difficulties of exploration are immense.
Because it is so deep in the Sun’s gravity well the amount of fuel needed is double what the distance
alone would suggest (about 50% more if an expedition originates on Venus). Huge velocity changes are
needed to match speed and to land, and to get back again afterwards. Ships going this close to the Sun
encounter many other problems, from overheating to radiation damage. They can be built or modified to
compensate, of course, but that adds considerably to the expense of an expedition.
There is no water or air; all supplies must be carried for the round trip. Fuel is also a problem; older
atomic blasts run on sodium salts, the later radium drives on iron salts. Both are rare on Mercury, usually
found as small deposits of the metal sulphides which are difficult to mine and inconvenient to use. When
the new protactinium blasts are available they will use lead, which is comparatively common on Mercury,
but until they are available fuel will be a real problem.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 25 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

A Matter of Gravity

With the exception of air, gravity is the
most noticeable factor in planetary
exploration.
On the smaller worlds and moons it’s
possible to carry more equipment with
less effort, although there are obvious
limits. It might be possible to carry a ton
of equipment at 0.1g, but it still has a ton
of mass; it’s hard work to get it moving,
even harder to stop it. Explorers carrying
large loads have occasionally been injured
when they tried to stop too suddenly, and
were hit by the equivalent of a compact
car travelling at several miles an hour. On
worlds with higher gravity than the Earth
it’s easy to become tired or suffer serious
injuries from “minor” falls.
Game Data: The table below shows
gravity, changes to the effective BODY of
a human, and modifiers to the Effect of
falls and hours of sleep needed:

Gravity
BODY * Falling / Sleep
0.25g or less
+4 – 4 **
0.25 – 0.5
+2 – 2
0.5 – 0.75
+1 – 1
0.75 – 1.25
~ Unchanged ~
1.25 – 1.5
-1 +1
1.5 – 1.75
-2 +2
Over 1.75g
-4 +4
* For feats of strength etc., not for damage
resistance. BODY is always at least 1
regardless of modifiers.
** An experienced traveller needs far less
sleep in low gravity, but newcomers often
suffer nausea and lose sleep at first.
Usually this ends in a few days. The Effect
of a fall is always at least 1.

Example: Jarvis (A Martian Odyssey) is fit (e.g.
BODY 5 or 6) and weighs about 210lb on
Earth. On Mars (0.4 g) he carries a 250lb
water tank (BODY 4 or so) with ease. With his
weight reduced by the low gravity, the total
effective weight is less than his weight on
Earth, but if he is moving fast and tries to
change speed or direction in a hurry the extra
250lb of inertial mass will make itself very
apparent. On Earth he prefers eight hours of
sleep; on Mars he will be rested after four.

1

The bright side is always at
temperatures measured in hundreds
of degrees. The surface is in a
continual state of flux, with
volcanoes and quakes continually
“churning” the rock. Today’s
mineral deposit may be tomorrow’s
volcano! There are pools of boiling
sulphur and molten lead, often
covered by a crust that looks like
firm ground. Explorers must wear
reflective suits (linked to a supply
of liquefied air or a refrigerator
pack) and can only work outside
for an hour or two a day at best.
The cold side is equally
inhospitable, a few tends of degrees
above absolute zero. While the cold
side surface is comparatively stable,
the difficulties of working in
extreme cold are immense; metals
snap and become brittle, lubricants Thermal suit for use on
freeze, and huge amounts of power Mercury; the umbilical line
is used to supply cool air
must be used to stay warm.
and remove heat. This
At any given time a “twilight” particular model passed all
zone a few miles wide has a tests on Earth, but failed in
temperate (but airless) climate, but practical use on the second
libration1
ensures
that
these expedition.
Smithsonian Institution
conditions are never stable for
more than a few days. After a week or so it will become
uncomfortable warm or cool, and it is time to move on.
Finally, tidal forces ensure that all parts of Mercury
experience frequent quakes, strong enough to topple a typical
freighter. Smaller exploratory ships are less likely to be
damaged, but there is still a substantial risk.
Putting these factors together, for the moment Mercury is
generally regarded as more trouble than it’s worth; there have
been several scientific expeditions, but none have found
enough gold, gems, or radioactive minerals to justify the
considerable risks and expense of a mining operation. There
appears to be no life there, so there are no medically useful
biochemical compounds, and the surface is too dangerous for
permanent scientific installations. For now, and possibly for
many years to come, it’s not worth visiting.

Wobbling – Mercury’s orbit is very eccentric, and its rotation sometimes lags behind its orbital position, and is sometimes ahead
of it. As a result of this eccentricity there is no permanent twilight zone, as on Venus; all parts of the border between the
bright and dark sides experience extremes of warmth and cold at some point in the planet’s short year.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 26 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

…It was mid-winter when the mudspout came. Mid-winter, that
is, in the Venusian sense, which is nothing at all like the
conception of the season generally entertained on Earth, except
possibly, by dwellers in the hotter regions of the Amazon basin,
or the Congo.
They, perhaps, might form a vague mental picture of winter
on Venus by visualizing their hottest summer days, multiplying
the heat, discomfort and unpleasant denizens of the jungle by
ten or twelve.
Parasite Planet

Venus: The Parasite Planet
First explored within a year of the first landing on Mars, Venus
is in some ways a wetter and more hospitable replica of
Mercury. Like Mercury, Venus is tidally locked to the sun, with
the best climate (ranging from 60° to 140°F over 15-day
seasons) in a relatively narrow Twilight Zone, the terminator
between the bright and dark hemispheres. But there the
resemblance ends; Venus teems with life, and parts of it are
habitable without much protection. Regrettably they aren’t the
most profitable parts, but they serve as an excellent springboard
for exploitation of the rest of the planet.
The habitable zone averages about 500 miles wide, and is for
the most part swampy. Venus has nearly as much water as
Earth, but much of it is frozen in the dark hemisphere. Hot
winds carry moisture into the dark side, cooling, sinking, and
melting the glaciers at the border as they do so; they feed water
back into the habitable zone, huge underground rivers which
undermine the surface and flow towards the sunlit hemisphere
before evaporating or turning back towards the dark. Sinkholes
and hot geysers are common, and the only stable areas are the
rare patches of rocky ground around occasional mountains and
the foothills bordering the Dark Side, the main colonised areas.
Although Venus has natives, the 2020 Lisle treaty splits the
planet into segments running from the hot edge of the
terminator to the middle of the Dark Side, their width
determined by the colonising nation’s share of the terminator
zone. The main claimants are Britain, America, the Pacific
Alliance, Holland and Russia.

The Hotlands
The Hotland swamps make up approximately eighty percent of
the Twilight Zone. They are implacably hostile, virtually
impassable without mud shoes, their air filled with deadly fungal
spores that would quickly devour anyone foolish enough to
breathe the air or drink the water without proper protection.
Transkin oversuits and filter masks must be worn at all times,
and all food must be canned, opened only when the spores have

An artist’s impression of Venus without the
cloud that normally enshrouds the planet.
The Twilight Zone is a green ring, 500 miles
wide, between the parched Bright Side and
the dark hemisphere. The white areas are
salt flats, a useful mineral source. The black
lines crossing the Twilight Zone to the Bright
Side are mountain ranges, their peaks
extending above the atmosphere.
UPI

Xixtchil

Venus’s main export is the spore pods
of the Xixtchil plant, which are
processed to make the rejuvenation
drug xixtline, trihydroxyl–tertiary–
tolunitrile–beta–anthraquinone (TripleT-B-A for short). The drug darkens and
restores hair, removes wrinkles, and
generally restores vitality. However, it
treats the symptoms of age rather than
the underlying causes, and may actually
reduce lifespan slightly, although the
statistical evidence is inconclusive. While
their effect is masked for some
considerable time, the toxins of aging
continue to accumulate in the muscles,
nerves, and brain, and eventually pass a
critical level at which the drug becomes
ineffective. After that aging is actually
accelerated until the body catches up
with its real age, and sometimes
continues for several months afterwards,
with senility an occasional side effect.
Currently the pods are worth their
weight in radium, and until someone
succeeds in synthesising the drug or
cultivating the pods on Earth it’s likely
that prices will remain very high.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 27 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

A Hotland native poses for the camera in
light rain. Unlike many Terrestrial primitives
they have no fear of photography and can
recognise themselves if shown a picture.
National Geographic

The Venusians
There are at least two sentient Venusian
species, but the Hotland natives are by
far the best known. They have a natural
immunity to fungal spores and,
although they face constant danger
from the other hazards of the swamps,
seem to have no fear of them. They can
predict mud-spouts and sink-holes and
avoid them instinctively, possibly by
sensing changes in the acidity or
temperature of the mud. While humans
must always wear cumbersome mudshoes, they customarily walk through
the mud, supported on four large
webbed feet (immersed in the picture).
Their language is inflective, like
Chinese, with apparently identical
words
having
multiple
meanings
according to inflection and context. For
example, “Murra” can be a greeting,
convey a warning, or may be
interpreted as an offer of friendship or a
challenge to fight! As a noun it can
mean peace, war, fear, or courage.
Very few explorers have mastered more
than basic words such as Murra, Usk
(What, Where, etc.), and Curky
(trader, stranger, guest, enemy).

settled after rain. Water must be boiled with Thermide tablets.
Unfortunately these are the areas where the natives live, and
where they are prepared to trade Xitchil plants and other rarities
for knives, beads, and other useful items. Further towards the
Dark Side the spore count decreases, and it’s possible to breathe
unfiltered air near the terminator glaciers.
The Hotland food chain is unusually complicated, gaining
most of its energy from thermosynthesis; conversion of infra-red
radiation to chemical energy by the mud bacteria. These are in
turn eaten by any of a hundred different species of “animal”,
“plant” or “fungus” (for want of better descriptive terms) which
also devour each other and are in turn eaten by the larger
species, while trying to devour them or infect them with their
spores. A typical example is Deas Gonzonian, a “worm” which
appears after rain. It has specifically evolved to mimic less
harmful species, its sole role in life being to be eaten – because
once eaten its spores, which have a waxy coating and strong
shell, and are highly resistant to most digestive enzymes, can
attack the eater from the inside!
These creatures are in turn preyed on by larger predators,
and eventually the most familiar plants and animals:
The Jack Ketch Tree is a carnivorous plant which deploys
hundreds of nooselike tendrils coated with digestive enzymes to
entangle and strangle its prey. Once caught, the prey is rotted
down and absorbed. Its branches can snare victims in seconds.
The so-called Friendly Tree also attempts to eat any animals
that come near it, via hundreds of small tendrils equipped with
sucker/mouths, but does so comparatively slowly. It’s possible
to climb one and sleep for several hours before it becomes really
dangerous, although it should be remembered that humans
aren’t the only creature to have realised this; several predators
are equipped to climb such trees without being eaten, and will
take a good deal of interest in anything else they encounter in
the branches. The Friendly Tree has a much more dangerous
relative, the Pharisee Tree, which looks virtually identical but
conceals hundreds of lethally sharp spikes in its branches.
Finally, Snake Vines are exactly what they sound like, tipped
with sharp venomous teeth which can easily penetrate transkin.
Jack Ketch Tree
Friendly Tree
Pharisee Tree
Snake Vine
1

BODY
15
12
12
6

Weapon
Noose1
Suckers2
Spikes3
Fangs3

Effect
6
1+1 per 2 hrs.
8+1D6 poison
1D6 poison

A
F
F
F
F

B
I
F
I
I

C
C/K
I
C/K
I

Attacks with Brawling 6. Breaking free of a noose is Difficulty 8.
I or C result is a broken limb of varying severity, K a broken neck.
2
Attacks with Brawling 2. Attacks cannot penetrate transkin but victims
must break free by overcoming Effect of its attack.
3
Attacks with Brawling 4. Any I or C/K wound penetrates transkin.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 28 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Venusians (continued)

A small doughpot, weighing approximately a ton, moves through shallow
water in search of food. Seconds after this photograph was taken it noticed the
photographer and chased him for several miles.
Smithsonian institution

The most dangerous Hotland predator by far is the
Doughpot, essentially an amorphous “blob” of de Proust cells
that eats anything in its path, growing and eventually dividing to
produce more doughpots as it does so. Sizes range from
microscopic to huge, up to twenty tons. Doughpots have been
described as mobile cancers, and even the Venusian natives
avoid them. Fortunately they are comparatively uncommon,
especially in the largest sizes. The reason is simple; if a doughpot
can’t get enough food the chemical communication between its
cells breaks down and it starts to eat itself, a vicious cycle that
can continue indefinitely. Doughpots lured to the Bright Side
deserts have taken this process to completion, lacking any sense
of self-preservation, leaving nothing but a few dried spores.
Doughpots cannot digest transkin, but anyone caught in one
is doomed; they are pulled in and pummelled, suffocated and
crushed, carried along with it until the suit rips, then digested.
Doughpot
1

BODY
6+2D6

Weapon
Bludgeon
Wrestle1
Suffocation

Effect
BODY +2
BODY +2
1+1/30 sec

A
F
F
I

B
I/C
I
I

C
C/K
C/K
C/K

The term “wrestle” is used very loosely. Essentially the victim is engulfed.
All attacks are accompanied by the use of digestive enzymes and infective
spores. Without a Transkin suit they are not survivable.

Although the Venusian language is
confusing, the natives seem to have a
code of honour; allegedly they will
always warn you before they decide to
kill you and take your belongings!
While the Venusians are superficially
simple hunter-gatherers, their arts and
crafts include silverwork, elaborate
beadwork, weapon-making and woodcarving; the latter is of course an
ephemeral art since the wood must be
processed to protect it from fungal
spores, and will inevitably succumb to
them sooner or later.
Attempts to explain the origin of
humans to the Venusians have always
failed; they seem to be unable to grasp
the concept of other worlds, probably
because the sky is never clear. They
generally seem to be uneasy about
discussing the matter.
Jfff’filtfik - ATypical Hotlander
BODY 3, MIND 2, SOUL 3
Pincers, Effect 5 (x2) A:F, B:I,C:I
Bite, Effect 6 A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Skills: Artist (silversmith) 5, Brawling 4,
Melee Weapon 5, Marksmanship 7
(bow, throwing knife), Sneak 6.
Quote: “Usk? Usk?? Murra!!” [makes a
complex but totally untranslatable gesture
and runs off.]
Notes: Despite huge claws Jffffiltfik is
surprisingly dextrous, and pities the
clumsy
humans
she
occasionally
encounters. She does understand that
humans are saying that they come from
another world, most Venusians do, but
conventional Venusian wisdom is that
humans are relatively friendly demons,
and that the world that they come from
is actually one of the colder circles of
the Hell of their religion, somewhere in
the Dark hemisphere. It’s considered
unsafe to state this explicitly, in case the
demons drag you back with them when
they go home.
Hotlander player characters should be
built on 14 points, and begin with no
knowledge of human languages or skills.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 29 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Adventure Idea: Medical Run
Five years ago Venoble suffered a
measles epidemic. On Earth this
childhood disease is rarely more than a
nuisance; on Venus most of the nativeborn colonists had no natural immunity
and several children died. Since then
Venoble’s hospital has kept stockpiles
of vaccine, ready for another epidemic;
unfortunately the new epidemic is in
Erotia.
If the adventurers are in Erotia and
don’t have their own ship they should
be hired to carry the news of the
epidemic to Venoble by land – radio
messages aren’t getting through and no
ship is available or expected for several
weeks. If they are in Venoble without a
ship they should be hired to carry the
drugs to Erotia; again, no ship is
expected in time to do any good. The
best land route crosses the Mountains
of Eternity (see Parasite Planet) and
several rivers, and is an arduous trek
with endless natural hazards.
If they do have a ship find a reason
why they can’t use it; for example, the
pilot may be one of the victims of the
disease, an engine part is needed before
it can fly again, the radio beacon
needed for a landing at Venoble may
be out of action because the operator is
ill, whatever seems most appropriate.
There needn’t be any other problem
en route, other than natural hazards,
but optionally the adventurers run into
a native who wants to trade them a
small fortune in Xixtchil pods, enough
to make one man rich – but are the
adventurers prepared to share and share
alike? A good source here is The
Treasure of the Sierra Madre. If you use
this option it may be advisable to
include NPCs in the expedition to cause
trouble, if the adventurers don’t seem
to be inclined to do so for themselves.
Alternatively, throw in a few bandits
(human or native) who think that the
supplies or vaccine the adventurers are
carrying must be some sort of treasure,
and decide to take it for themselves.

The main weather systems affecting the Cool Country; moist air rises from the
Hotlands and cools as it reaches the Night Side. A continuous electrical and ice
storm moves backwards and forwards with libation. Ice sometimes settles on the
Barrier glaciers, sometimes melts, so that there is a continual movement of ice,
while the weight of the ice cap as a whole pushes up hills of glacial rock and
sediment. Cooler dry air and cold rivers return towards the Hotlands.

The Cool Country
The section of the habitable zone closest to the dark hemisphere is
usually referred to as the Cool Country; the average temperature
(below 80°F throughout the year) is too low to sustain the
ubiquitous spores of the Hotlands, and the prevailing winds blow
away the few that make it into the area. It’s possible to survive
without a transkin and respirator. There are still dangers;
doughpots and other predators are capable of surviving in these
areas, as well as some predatory plants such as the Jack Ketch
tree, but “true” trees and plants predominate. There are still large
areas of cool swampland, though rocky ground is more common
in the foothills below the eternal glaciers. There are vicious
piranha-like predators in the rivers, and the highlands are often
subject to devastating lightning storms. Despite these problems it’s
one of the more habitable regions off Earth, with a temperate
climate, ample water and air, and a few edible plant and animal
species (thorough cooking and a strong stomach are
recommended).
There are several settlements with population averaging a few
hundred, the largest being Erotia (the capital of the American
zone; the name is Latin for Cupid, son of Venus) and Venoble
(The British capital; named for Henry Venoble, British President at
the time of colonization). There is even a small but vocal
independence movement with supporters in all of the national
zones, although realistically it will probably be another twenty to
forty years before Venus has built up the industrial base and
infrastructure needed for true self-sufficiency.
Communication and travel between the separate colonies is
difficult. Formidable mountains and other natural obstacles block
land travel, and the omnipresent lightning storms usually drown
radio signals. At present the main means of transport is by rocket.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 30 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Planetary Trading Corporation prospectus contained
grandiose plans for a monorail to link Erotia and Venoble,
including a mountain tunnel at least twenty miles long, but in the
wake of the company’s collapse it has been estimated that the
project would have required most of Venus’s metal production
over two to three years. Construction of a road is a little more
plausible, since most of the route could be cleared and levelled
using native rock and a tractor-mounted atomic blast, but the
best routes run too close to glaciers for comfort and it would still
be necessary to construct an extremely long tunnel – and since
the road would have to be at ground level, travellers would have
to be ready for encounters with doughpots and other unwelcome
flora and fauna. The thought of running into a doughpot or a
pack of triops deep inside a mountain is the stuff of nightmares.
For now, at least, the colonies remain separate.

The Glacial Zone
The glacial edge of the Cool Country had a reputation for being
haunted until it was learned that a Dark Side species, triops
noctivivans, has adapted to conditions in this zone and attacks
travellers when it can. The species resembles an “apelike” version
of the Hotland natives, with larger eyes and claws rather than
pincers. They are extremely vicious, pelting travellers with stones
and seed pods containing a narcotic vapour then consuming their
unconscious bodies. Triops bodies contain natural alcohols, acting
as antifreeze, which are toxic to most other Venusian life, and it
may eventually be possible to manufacture these chemicals in
quantity and use them to eradicate doughpots and other
unwanted species around the colonies.

The Dark Side
Most of what is known of the Dark Side comes from the joint
Royal Society / Smithsonian institution expedition of 20991,
which discovered various plant and animal species including an
allegedly intelligent plant species, Lotophagi Veneris, the source of
the narcotic pods thrown by Triops. This species appears to have
no survival instinct whatever, and releases a vapour which slowly
saps the willpower of humans who inhale it for prolonged
periods. They are apparently able to read human thoughts and
assimilate human languages, but appear to be unable to add new
concepts. They claim a deep understanding of the universe, but
their philosophy appears to be little more than fatalism; they
have no willpower, and seem likely to become extinct within the
next few decades, as the Triops eat the last of the species.

1

Triops noctivivans

BODY 4, MIND 1, SOUL 1
Claws, Effect 5 (x2) A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Bite, Effect 7 A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Stones, Effect 5, A:F, B:F, C:I/KO
Seed pods, Area 10ft gas cloud, effect
3+1/round, A: –, B: –, C: KO
Skills: Brawling 6, Marksmanship 4
(throwing seed pods etc.), Sneak 6.
Quote: “Oook ooop oook Grrrrrr!”
Notes: The species name means "threeeyed dweller in the dark" and is
entirely descriptive. The pods they
throw derive from one of the Dark Side
plants, and the gas they contain is a
strong narcotic which takes effect
extremely quickly. They attack in packs
of four to six. Their main weakness is
an aversion to bright light; they are
only encountered in dark or near-dark
conditions. While they are generally
described as a Dark Side species, their
anatomy suggests that they are
comparatively recent migrants from the
Hotlands or Cool Country, within the
last 20,000-50,000 years.

Lotophagi Veneris

BODY 2, MIND 7, SOUL 1
No physical attacks.
Surrounded by clouds of narcotic
vapour, Effect 1+1/hour, causes
apathy if it overcomes BODY.
Skills: Acquire any purely mental skill
(e.g. Science, Linguist, Scholar) that
they are exposed to at the same level as
the person who possesses the skill. No
other skills.
Quote: “When we are gone it will make
no difference to any except the trioptes
who eat us.”
Notes: The species name means
“Venusian Lotus Eater.” The gas is a
more dilute version of the pods thrown
by Triops. It can be stopped by a filter
mask, as used in the Hotlands, or a
spacesuit
helmet.
Physically
the
Lotophagi are mobile plants described
as resembling “an inverted bushel
basket” with multiple eyes.

The Lotus Eaters

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 31 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Moon
Surface gravity:
0.17g
Distance from Earth:
250,000 miles
Day:
27.3 days
Orbital period:
27.3 days
Often dismissed as a “worthless cinder”
or worse, Earth’s moon offers little that
isn’t more readily available elsewhere in
the Solar System, generally on worlds
that have atmospheres and other useful
features. While there’s evidence for a
little mineral wealth, mostly deep
underground, the accessible resources are
mostly lighter elements that are readily
found on Earth. There’s no air, water, or
life that hasn’t been brought there from
Earth. About all the Moon has in
abundance is rock and vacuum.
Fortunately there are uses for an
airless moon; by far the most profitable is
the electronics industry. Lunar rock is
high in silicates, and most of the vacuum
tubes and vision screens sold on Earth
come from one or another of the Lunar
factories.
Other facilities include an observatory
and dumping sites for radioactive
materials such as damaged atomic blasts.
There are occasional scare stories
suggesting that pirates are secretly based
on the Moon, or that the waste sites
could explode and crack the Moon like
an eggshell or drive it out of orbit, but
nobody takes them seriously. The reality
is that the Moon is useful but boring.

Adventure Idea: Scrapheap
The adventurers need a part that’s no
longer made to repair their ship’s
obsolete atomic blast. Nobody has one in
stock, but there might just be one in the
lunar junkyard, a ship of the same type
was scrapped there a few months ago. Of
course things won’t be that simple… the
engine room is radioactive, and there are
signs that someone has been removing
components, and paying very little
attention to safety while doing so. Why
do some parts seem to have been nibbled
away? And why do the adventurers feel
that they’re being watched…?

Carol smiled. She had never visited the small pinprick in the
black called Earth, but she had read of it, read of its cities built
into the air, its underground highways, its beautiful women.
Tidal Moon

Earth: Cradle of Mankind
The home of mankind and cradle of civilization, Earth is still
the economic and social hub of the Solar System. Admittedly
it’s currently a rather battered hub, wounded by war and a
serious economic recession, but nobody really doubts that
Earth will bounce back reasonably soon.
As may be obvious from the map, the twentieth century
tendency to form “super-states” amalgamating the political or
economic interests of several countries continued in the
twenty-first. Some of the changes could have probably been
predicted, others must have seemed unlikely until they
happened:
• The USA formed economic links to the South, with the
United Americas eventually becoming a single economic
community. The nations within the UA are still selfgoverning, to about the same extent that states were in the
old USA, but all use a common currency, the dollar, which
is now also the main currency used off-world, and owe
allegiance to Washington. Canada stayed independent and
is on reasonably good terms with the United Americas, but
a closer ally of Britain. Southern Ireland joined the UA in
the 2040s, as a way of staving off British influence.

•

Brazil responded to the rise and southward spread of the
UA by forming links with other South American nations,
united primarily by their distrust of the UA. In recent years
the Brazilian Federation has become a little more relaxed in
its dealings with the UA, and there have been joint
agreements on trade which some interpret as a prelude to a
final amalgamation of the Federation and UA.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 32 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Power Bloc

Military
Average Life
Registered
Infant
Spending Income
Expectancy Mortality per Spacecraft
1000 births
[LON fleet]
$ billions (dollars) (years)
United Americas
0.96
14,592
583.7 15,200
85”
2.7
27 [3]
Brazilian Federation
0.42
4,620
184.8 11,000
82”
4.1
9 [2]
Russian Empire
0.33
3,036
151.8
9,200
85”
3.6
8 [1]
Europe
0.46
6,164
180.9 13,400
88”
2.9
12 [2]
British Commonwealth
1.05
15,225
761.3 14,500
87”
4.5
16 [2]
Africa
0.60
1,260
68.0
2,100
72”
22.8
3 [1]
Pacific Alliance
0.35
1,925
134.6
5,500
752
16.5
4 [1]
China1
0.70
<300
<25 <1000
70”
25.3
None
1
Figures for China exclude occupied zones and should be treated with caution.
2
Currently reduced due to deaths of Pacific War veterans, will probably rise to 80+ within fifteen to twenty years.

•

•

•

Population
Billions

GNP
$ Billions

Russian Communism fell; to avoid anarchy the rebels
restored the Tsar as a symbol of unification. The expanded
Russian Empire is now a constitutional monarchy, with the
monarch having very little real power.
The smaller European colonial empires broke up, their
colonies becoming independent or joining larger local
alliances. Europe is now a loose association of states, the
United States of Europe, but constant bickering makes this
perhaps the least effective government on Earth. Essentially
European nations retain most of their independence, paying
lip service to the USE when it suits them to combine
economic or military forces. Several European nations have
their own colonies in space, such as the Dutch and French
zones on Venus. Europe still has nominally Communist and
Fascist governments, although a 20th century observer
would think of both as mild variants on socialism.
Britain retained most of its Empire, now the
Commonwealth, which still encompasses South Africa and
Rhodesia, Iran, India, Burma and Hong Kong, with a
scattering of other possessions such as the Falklands and
Gibraltar; while independent, Australia, Canada, and New
Zealand also owe their allegiance to the British Crown.
Despite its small size, Britain still packs an enormous
political, economic and military punch.

•

With the decline of the European empires most of Africa
was united by a new Mahdi, and is now an Islamic
caliphate. There has been a general liberalization of Islam
over the last century; women are allowed to appear
unveiled, although they are denied the vote. There are
border tensions between the Caliphate and Commonwealth.

•

The Pacific Alliance originally formed to resist the Japanese
Empire’s expansion into the Philippines. This led to the
2075 Pacific War, a Buddhist revolt in Tibet and China,
and the surrender of Japan. The current capital is Manila.

Off-world
Colonies
6
2
3
5
4
None
None
None

The League of Nations
The League, with headquarters in Geneva,
is the main forum for resolving disputes
between nations. With the exception of
China all of the power blocs and
independent nations send representatives
to the League and for the most part obey
its directives and decisions. It’s assumed
that if any of Earth’s colonies become
independent they will also join the League.
As originally constituted the League
was virtually toothless, and would have
been unable to do anything really effective
to defend the peace, but in 1935 Italy
invaded Ethiopia, and Britain (perceiving
the invasion as a threat to its African
colonies) blockaded Italian Somaliland,
claiming to be acting in defence of League
principles. While this was barely justifiable,
it set a precedent which led to the defeat
of the German occupation of the
Rhineland in 1936; Britain blockaded
Germany while France sent a division into
the Rhineland and drove out the Germans.
Recognizing that this was likely to set the
pattern for future conflicts, the League
treaties were amended to legitimize such
interventions.
Eventual results included the slow
declines of Fascist and Communist
dictatorships in the forties and fifties, with
every move to expand their territories
blocked before it could really begin.
Gradually the League expanded its
membership and mandate, opposing
militarism and promoting civil liberties, and
was one of the principal factors in forming
the world as we know it today.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 33 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The League of Nations (continued)
The League controls Earth’s space
fleet, twenty-two ships including twelve
owned by national governments but
permanently assigned to League duties.
It is used mainly for piracy suppression
and rescue operations in the vicinity of
the Earth, but patrols take in Venus,
Mars, and the outer worlds.

Everyday Life
Generally speaking, most of Earth is
peaceful and prosperous; many old
political rivalries have now moved to
the new frontier of space, others are
now mainly economic. Naturally there
are still dangers; China and parts of
Africa are unsafe for anyone who
appears to be wealthy or foreign.
Despite the recent stock market
crash, now believed to be the result of
a fraud that spiralled out of control,
the richer countries are still well off;
the average working man owns his own
home (or is at least able to pay the
mortgage), and is likely to own a
ground car, a vision set, a washing
machine, telephone and other luxuries.
He can probably support a family in
reasonable comfort, with access to
excellent medical care if needed.
In cities public transport uses
subways, robo-buses and robo-taxis;
monorails and rockets are used for
most long distance travel. There are
even a few ocean liners left, though
their appeal is romanticism and
nostalgia, not speed.

Several layers of underground roads surface
in midtown Manhattan.
Reuters

•

Finally, China is now ruled by a loose alliance of Buddhist
sects, but there are still large areas where the old Japanese
garrisons aren’t going quietly and sporadic fighting continues.
Fortunately nobody is using atomic weapons, although the
Japanese may still possess them. Mostly the Chinese are
waiting out the aging Japanese forces, and only resort to
military action if there is no alternative. Outsiders are asked
to avoid giving any aid or support to the Japanese, and there
are stringent laws against supplying them with arms etc.
Needless to say there are a good few non-aligned nations, as well
as nations with ties to more than one political bloc. For example,
Canada has trade and defence ties with the United Americas and
France as well as the Commonwealth; Australia has naval treaties
with the Pacific Alliance.
There are also cases of nations disagreeing over the goals and
alliances of their power bloc. For example, the British
Commonwealth has naval treaties with the Brazilian Federation,
which amongst other things allows Federation ships to use port
facilities on the Falkland Islands to replenish their supplies.
Argentina, a member of the Federation, refuses to acknowledge
Britain’s sovereignty over the Falklands. For this reason any
Argentinean ships accompanying the Federation fleet fly Chilean
colours if they have to use the Falklands facilities; it’s a legal
fiction to avoid acknowledging British sovereignty.
Most governments are currently reasonably liberal; the
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries saw huge infringements
of civil liberties, and there has been a backlash against
unnecessary controls and monitoring of the population. Even the
Caliphate and Pacific Alliance follow broadly democratic
principles, despite their relative poverty. Sometimes this freedom
might seem to go too far; it’s easy for criminals to vanish, since
few nations require proof of identity on a routine basis. Most of
the perpetrators of the Planetary Trading Corporation scam
dropped out of sight and seem unlikely to be found, and it is
known that the pirate “Red Peri” and her associates spent time
on Earth without detection. It’s possible that they still do so.
One thing common to most nations is cheap electricity. It’s
easy to build a power plant based on a uranium-sodium atomic
blast; sea water is fed in, a small proportion of the sodium in its
salt is converted to energy, and superheated steam comes out to
drive a turbine. If the steam is cooled afterwards it can be used
as pure distilled water – the tiny amount of radioactive material
that gets into the water as it boils is usually left behind with the
salt, or diluted so much as to be harmless. The Sahara
desalination project depends on this technology, and most of
California and Nevada would be uninhabitable without it. Landlocked nations such as Switzerland and Bolivia must make other

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 34 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

arrangements, of course, but salt is found nearly everywhere and
can easily be shipped where it is needed. Most ground vehicles,
motor boats, etc. are electrical, run off high-capacity batteries;
aircraft and ships are usually atomic, propelled directly by an
atomic blast or indirectly by some version of the sea water
turbine system. Electricity isn’t free – there are still construction
and infrastructure costs, and some uranium is needed to
replenish the blast occasionally – but on average it’s negligibly
cheap compared to food, rent, and other expenses.
The most notable exception to the general prosperity is
China, where fighting continues and the Japanese hold-outs still
continue to loot the countryside. The general lawlessness of the
occupied areas make them a haven for every sort of scum and
villainy; several gangs of air pirates operate from Chinese
territory, and until the discovery of the Red Peri’s lair on Pluto it
was believed that the fabled space pirate might also be based
there. The League of Nations has repeatedly offered to help
China deal with the situation, but the Chinese politely point out
that the League originally supported the Japanese occupation of
Manchuria, and did little to prevent their eventual conquest of
China as a whole. Outside help is not required, but the Chinese
government will always be happy to help the League should the
need arise. The League has yet to take up the Chinese offer.

Adventure Idea: Mercy Flight
The adventurers are hired to help rescue a group of medical
missionaries who are trapped between Japanese and Chinese forces
somewhere in Manchuria. They might own the spaceship or
atmospheric rocket used for the rescue flight, or might be mercenaries
hired to protect it while it’s on the ground.
In theory the job is simple; fly in, land, load the missionaries, and
fly out. Of course things aren’t that simple; the nearest suitable landing
site is nearly a mile from the hospital, and the route is exposed to
enemy fire. There are more doctors and patients than the ship can
carry in a single flight. And optionally at least one of the doctors is
trying to smuggle out stolen Ming dynasty art or other bulky valuables
disguised as “essential records” or “medical specimens.”
Alternatively, the hospital has already been captured by the
Japanese by the time the adventurers arrive; the doctors are being held
at gunpoint, and will be used as hostages to make the adventurers give
up their ship.

Visiting Earth
It can probably be assumed that most readers either live on Earth
or were born there; for the rare exceptions, it may be necessary
to explain that due to the crowded nature of most areas of the
planet flame pistols and explosive bullets are banned nearly
everywhere, while most other weapons will at the very least
arouse considerable comment. There are also various restrictions

An NYPD officer boards a hovering gyro to
issue speeding and lane violation tickets. His
own gyro hovers to the right, out of shot.

Everyday Life (continued)
For the wealthy, gyros were at one
time the “must-have” status symbol,
but as the price of basic models fall
they are becoming more common for
the merely well-to-do who need to
commute long distances, since they can
be flown without a full pilot’s license.
Most modern cities have flight lanes
and landing pads for them.
The main entertainment mediums
are the vision and radio channels; most
cities have as many as six or eight
vision stations, and even isolated areas
can usually receive two or three. A
typical family vision receiver has a 24”
3D colour screen and stereo sound;
larger receivers are available, but cost
as much as a gyro. One of the most
popular shows is the Yerba Mate hour,
shown every week since the early 21st
century, with a succession of hosts, and
is now syndicated globally. It’s almost
impossible to think of a vision star that
hasn’t appeared on the show at some
point in their career.
Fashions change almost daily in the
modern world, spread globally by the
costumes of celebrities seen on screen,
but for many years the prevailing
women’s leisure styles have been
minimalist; a tabard or cuirass over
abbreviated shorts, semi-transparent
fabrics, metallic brassieres, and so
forth. Men’s clothing, and women’s
clothing for harsher environments, tend
more towards the utilitarian.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 35 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Industries
Earth is the home of most of the
industries in the Solar System, and the
hub for nearly all trade.
The Interplanetary Corporation is
based in New York, and famous for the
ferocity with which it tries to maintain
a near-monopoly on the technology of
space travel1. This has led to allegations
of patent theft and corruption, a recent
stock market investigation2, and a
slump in its share value. Financial
journalists believed at first that the
company’s current troubles might be
the prelude to a hostile takeover bid,
but there is no evidence that any
mayor investor is trying to acquire
shares, let alone a controlling interest
in the company; the general downward
trend suggests dumping of poorlyperforming stock, with small investors
buying most of the shares.
Boyds of London is the global
market leader in insurance. Its
economic importance is so great that
Britain still enforces the death penalty
for acts of piracy1, regardless of other
factors, where most other nations
reserve it for murder. Piracy often
involves murder, so this distinction isn’t
always clear, but where an American
court might hand down a ten or twenty
year sentence for bloodless piracy, a
British court will hang.
There is no clear leader in the
lucrative extraterrestrial pharmaceutical
industry; in the USA Pfazer and Jenson
and Jenson are the major players, in
Britain Galaxo and Imperial Chemical
Enterprises dominate, with at least a
dozen other companies active around
the world. Competition is fierce, on
and off the Earth, since the first
company to identify a new alien drug
and bring it to market can earn
hundreds of millions of dollars. The
spectacular successes of anti-aging
drugs based on Xixtchil pods and
medicines based on Ganymedan Cree
moss show how high the stakes can be.
1

The Red Peri

2

Redemption Cairn

on the import of plants and animals that might be able to survive
on Earth; these apply especially to Venusian plants and animals,
the slinkers of Io, and Plutonian crystal “organisms.” Most longterm off-world residents will find the gravity unpleasantly high
and the crowds somewhat daunting. Visitors are strongly advised
to employ a reputable guide for the duration of their stay.
Although the first alien contact was more than a century ago,
only a handful of aliens have visited Earth; the League has made
it clear that any attempt to transport aliens to Earth unwillingly
will be treated as kidnapping and enslavement, both serious
offences under international law. To date three Martians, two
Venusians and one Ganymedan Nympus have made the trip
voluntarily; so far as can be determined the Martians seemed to
enjoy themselves but were tired by Earth’s gravity and spent
much of their time rooted, while the Venusians felt that the
Everglades were “too bland” (despite one of them having been
bitten by a water moccasin) and said that they would not be
returning. The Nympus is currently a guest of the Smithsonian
institution, and under their auspices is recording an anthology of
traditional Ganymedan folk tales, most of them revolving around
a trickster god or gods who delight in tormenting lesser beings
with complicated natural disasters.

Adventure Idea: Innocent Abroad
The adventurers stumble across two thugs beating up a visitor to
Earth; Greg Grady, a Venus colonial. When the adventurers arrive
the thugs run off. Grady doesn’t want to go to the police; he’s
worried that they might be in the pockets of the Interplanetary
Corporation. If anyone asks why (and they probably will) he explains
that they want his land, and will stop at nothing to get the title deeds.
Naturally it’s a scam; the thugs work for Grady. Exactly what is
supposed to be on the land (about five hundred square miles in the
Venusian Cool Country) is left to the referee, who ought to be able
to tailor the story to the gullibility of players. For example:
• “A vein of pure Venusian silver as thick as your arm.”
• “A whole damn Xixtchil forest, no need to trade with the natives
to get the stuff.”
• “That freighter that crash-landed last year; the crew are dead, but
it’s on my land fair and square, and the courts have given me six
months to salvage it. The cargo’s worth millions if I can just get it
out.”
The objective, of course, is to trick the adventurers into buying the
land or investing in the scheme, whatever it is. Needless to say the
land is more or less worthless, the deeds (and any other papers that
might be produced) are forged, and the Interplanetary Corporation
has no interest in it at all.
As an alternative, maybe the story is entirely true, and the
Corporation really is after the land. The snag, of course, is that
anyone associated with Grady becomes a target as soon as they get
involved, and the Corporation really is as ruthless as he claims.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 36 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Early Mars maps were surprisingly accurate given the telescopes available; modern maps differ mainly in fine detail.
Note that South is at the top of this map, and that the poles (which are more or less featureless) are omitted.

The thin air, still scarcely warmed by the rising sun, bit flesh and
lung like needles, and they gasped with a sense of suffocation.
They dropped to a sitting posture, waiting for their bodies,
trained by months in acclimatization chambers back on earth, to
accommodate themselves to the tenuous air. Valley of Dreams
“…the city rose out of the desert as abruptly as a cliff. Only a
few little sand mounds marked the division, and then the walls of
those gigantic structures.
“The architecture was strange, too. There were lots of devices
that are impossible back home, such as set-backs in reverse, so
that a building with a small base could spread out as it rose. That
would be a valuable trick in New York, where land is almost
priceless, but to do it, you’d have to transfer Martian gravitation
there!
Valley of Dreams
“…You know civilization isn’t the personal prerogative of
mankind, because look at the mighty decadent culture on Mars
and the dead remnants on Titan.”
The Lotus Eaters

Mars: Planet of the Thoth

This painting in the Smithsonian’s Mars
gallery depicts Jarvis and Tweel at the end
of their adventures. The artist worked
from monochrome photographs and
colours are not entirely accurate; in
particular, the plants should be greener
since their encounters took place in
irrigated areas near the Martian canals.

It’s extraordinarily lucky that the first successful interplanetary
expedition found friends – the beaked Thoth people who we generally think of as the “true” Martians –
and a world where humans could survive without any of the impediments that make life on Venus so
uncomfortable. A properly acclimatised human needs no life support equipment, other than a Thermo-

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 37 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Phobos and Deimos
Orbital Height:
Surface Gravity:
Orbital Period:

Phobos

Deimos

3700 ml.
12400 ml.
~ Negligible ~
7.5 hrs.
30 hrs.

The moons of Mars are tidally locked
captured stony asteroids.
Phobos is about fourteen miles wide,
seems about a third the diameter of
Earth’s moon from the surface of Mars,
and is below the horizon at any point
within about 700 miles of the Martian
poles. It orbits faster than the rotation
of Mars so rises in the West and sets in
the East on an eleven hour cycle. It is
eclipsed by Mars for a few minutes
during most orbits.
Deimos is roughly eight miles across,
but shaped more like a potato than a
normal moon. It looks like a bright
planet or star in the sky, and it takes a
keen eye to spot its comparative
closeness.
Radio beacons have been installed on
both moons, and there is a League of
Nations rescue cache on Phobos,
containing fuel, medical supplies, tools,
and other equipment and goods that
might be useful in the event of an
emergency.

Adventure Idea: Beacon

Last year a freighter with a faulty radio
came close to running into Deimos. The
powers that be have decided that lights
will be mounted on the moon, covering
every angle except straight down
towards the surface – nobody is sure
how the Thoth would react to new lights
in the sky so they will be fitted with
shades and angled so that they can’t be
seen from Mars. The adventurers have
the job of installing them. While doing
so they stumble across something
unexpected; the wreck of an ancient
chemical rocket built for a Thoth pilot.
It’s the first absolute proof that the
Thoth travelled in space, although this
has long been suspected; what will the
adventurers do about it?

Skin™ sleeping bag and warm clothing, and can stay out in the
open without any risk of disease or poisoning, in perfect safety,
other than the slight risk of encountering one of the so-called
Dream Beasts or another of the rare Martian predators. There
are disadvantages, of course; we probably understand the
Thoth less than any of the other intelligent races we’ve
encountered, which is surprising considering the efforts that
both sides have made to establish communications. We have no
common ground with the other Martian races.
It was clear from the outset, of course, that Mars was home
to an advanced civilization; we can see evidence of their
engineering works from Earth! The Ares expedition made
friendly contact with the Thoth and established that the canals
were exactly what they appear to be; broad strips of irrigated
land bordering artificial waterways. For at least ten thousand
years the Thoth (with their even more enigmatic “MoundBuilder” allies) have built and tended the network of canals,
pumping stations, and power plants needed to distribute a
dwindling water supply around the planet, overcoming
unimaginable odds to keep their world alive. With atomic
power now added to their capabilities the balance has begun to
tilt in their favour, although the supply of water to the
equatorial cities is still limited.
It’s fashionable to refer to the Thoth as ‘decadent’, because
they have deserted most of their cities and obviously declined
enormously in number. But it seems likely that this was a
deliberate decision, a rational response to the dwindling supply
of fuel which kept the race alive. Uncontrolled expansion
would have surely doomed them long before humans arrived
on the scene. Their ingenious solar power stations and
windmills make the most of the limited energy available from
the Sun, and their designs are now in use on Earth in areas
where it isn’t practical to install atomic power plants. While
there was an initial theory that they might be tending this
equipment by rote, it’s now clear that they understand the
technology; for example, when a group of Martians were
shown plans for an adaptation of their windmill designs to
Earth’s gravity and wind forces they initially seemed surprised
and drew a revised version more suited to Martian conditions,
following human drafting conventions although this was the first
time they had seen such plans. Once they understood that it
was a design for Earth, not Mars, they made several useful
changes suggesting a detailed knowledge of aerodynamics. It
should be noted that they and the Mound-Builders continue to
tend and use the older power systems, even though they now
have several atomic power plants; it’s probable that this is

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 38 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

simple caution, but some observers believe that this is “makework” intended to keep the mound builders usefully busy.
There are many theories about the Mound-Builders, but little
has been learned since the first landing on Mars. There is
evidence to suggest that each mound is to some extent a hive
mind, whose members share a single consciousness and will, but
if so it must presumably be a very
limited form of intelligence; time
and motion studies suggest that at
least forty percent of the activity
inside their mounds is
wasted effort, cancelled
out by the activities of
another Mound-Builder
within minutes. Nobody is entirely sure
how deep the mounds go; several
explorers have been lost in their depths.
Mound-Builders have been known to
throw themselves into the fertilizer they
mix to support their colonies, and some writers have suggested
that they regard the Thoth as another source of nutrient
chemicals, pointing to Wells’ Morlocks and Eloi as an analogy. In
fact there is very little evidence to support this hypothesis;
Mound-Builders have been seen removing Thoth corpses on only
two occasions, and there is every reason to believe that both of
the Thoth in question died naturally.
Since it has never been entirely clear that the Martians would
welcome large-scale colonisation, there is only one permanent
human settlement, a few miles outside the largest inhabited
Martian city, Syrtis Parva at 0°N 255°W. It’s jointly
administered by the United Americas and British Commonwealth
under a League of Nations charter. Explorers only venture far
North or South in the appropriate hemisphere’s summer. It has
sometimes been argued that there would be more colonies if the
Martians hadn’t been given atomic power, but there is no way to
put that particular genie back into its bottle. Although the
Martians were only given one atomic blast they now have five
atomic power plants; it is believed that the Thoth use specially
bred biopods to extract minute traces of uranium from the soil,
but the processes used to concentrate it and obtain usefully large
pure samples remain a mystery.
A more practical reason for the lack of colonies is a lack of
raw materials on Mars; as already noted, it has taken the Thoth
nearly a hundred years to obtain enough uranium to fuel five
power plants. Gold and the other precious metals are similarly
rare, and gems seem to be very scarce; most of the geological
processes that produce them are minimal on Mars. This leaves

Kingdom Areobiota
Most Martian species are members of
the kingdom Areobiota, which literally
means “Martian organisms.” All
members of the phylum are carbonbased life-forms sharing some of the
characteristics of plants and animals;
they can photosynthesise and fulfil
some or all of their biochemical needs
by making complex chemicals from the
atmosphere, soil chemicals, and water.
To supplement their diets many of
the higher forms also eat the lower
forms, while many of the lower forms
eat carrion, since there are no decay
organisms in the conventional sense.
While it was previously thought that
“hybrid” organisms of this type would
be woefully inefficient and slow,
experience on Mars has shown that this
is simply not the case; the chemical
processes used by Martian life have
evolved to greater efficiency than those
of Earth, presumably a response to the
harsh environment. This efficiency and
the simplified food chains made
possible by the dual nature of
Areobiota more than compensate for
the reduced amount of solar energy
reaching the planet.
Reproduction of all Aerobiota
species is via parthenogenesis; there is
only one sex, and any two members of
the same species can join, share genes,
and bud to produce offspring. There is
some evidence that in the case of the
Thoth the offspring inherit skills and
knowledge from their parents, but this
has never been proved conclusively
since communications difficulties are so
great. The criteria for pairing are
unknown; nothing analogous to a
mating ritual has been observed, and
relationships appear to last only as long
as it takes for the offspring to reach a
suitable size for separation; the child
separates from both parents when it is
about two thirds of adult size (about
250 Mars days after parthenogenesis),
and then appears to be cared for by
the community as a whole.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 39 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Thoth

The Thoth are the most advanced
Aerobiota. They are erect bipeds
adapted to travel by walking or leaping;
taking
off
by
explosively
fast
contraction of the leg muscles, and
landing head-first! As shown above the
legs first contract then extend very
rapidly, propelling the Thoth high into
the air; it controls its “flight” and
descent by flexing its neck, arms and
legs. Heights of up to 80 ft and a
maximum distance of 170ft have been
reported. The brain of a Thoth is
located in its body, not the head, and
the long flexible neck and beaklike
snout act as a shock absorber in the
landing. It’s notable that on rocky
terrain their leaps tend to be much
shorter, suggesting that the soft
Martian soil also absorbs some of the
impact of landing. They have
occasionally been seen leaping from
ground level to openings high overhead
in their cities.
The Thoth obtain most of their
nutrition from the soil and sunlight, but
sometimes eat immature biopod buds,
the Martian equivalents of fruit and
seeds. Thoth have been offered human
foods on numerous occasions but have
never eaten it.
Biologists speculate that there may
have been dangerous predator species
on Mars in the past; the shape of the
Thoth head and placement of eyes give
them panoramic vision, while their
leaping ability would allow them to
escape from most threats. Both suggest
a species which evolved to evade
something considerably more active
than the “Dream Beasts” of Mars.
Continued next page

the main Martian exports as antiques removed (with Thoth
permission) from the abandoned cities, various biopod-derived
chemicals with minor medical importance, and an occasional “Jarvis
Crystal,” the cancer-cure discovered by the first expedition. After
the first expedition there were numerous attempts to find more
crystals in occupied and abandoned Mound-Builder burrows, and
most of the fatalities of the
early years were due to
accidents underground. All of
these attempts failed; the
Mound-Builders seem to have
taken steps to prevent further
thefts, presumably by moving
the jewels to more secure
locations, and can’t be
reasoned with or threatened.
The Thoth apparently know more, but don’t seem to be interested
in answering questions. Occasionally the Thoth give a crystal to one
of the colonists, usually in exchange for something that seems to
interest them; to date the trades have included a case of empty
beer bottles, passages to Earth, a fork-lift truck with a burned-out
motor, a poster of Woody Woodpecker, a wrist watch, and an
incomplete collection of Popular Mechanics magazines from 2047 to
2053. They have ignored subsequent attempts to trade more
bottles, watches, posters, trucks, etc. On two other occasions the
crystals seem to have been outright gifts to humans who have
helped a Thoth in some way. Crystals are worth between $25,000
and $100,000 on Earth, depending on their size. They are the
only known cure for several of the most deadly cancers, but
prolonged exposure has been known to weaken the immune system,
sometimes before the original cancer has been cured.
The Thoth probably explored the Solar System when they were
at the height of their power, circa 15,000 BC. Murals in several
Martian cities depict scenes of Martians surrounded by humans who
appear to be worshipping them1. Leroy, of the Ares expedition,
believed that the picture resembled pre-Dynastic Egyptian images of
the god Thoth; on hearing the name the Martians became excited
and confirmed that it was their name for their species. Other
evidence includes the presence of at least one off-world species on
Mars; rat-like creatures described by the first expedition and
subsequently captured by later explorers are larger but degenerate
relatives of the Slinkers of Io2. It’s possible that these creatures were
brought to Mars by explorers from yet another world, of course,
but the simplest explanation is that they are descended from
specimens brought back by Martian explorers.
1

Valley of Dreams.

2

The Mad Moon.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 40 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Since the Martians didn’t have atomic power their flights
must have taken years, and can only have been possible if the
Martians slowed their plant-like metabolisms and took root for
the duration of a low-energy Hohmann-type orbital flight. If it’s
true that the Martians deliberately transported slinkers to their
home-world it’s possible that they had some means of suspended
animation. Alternatively, slinkers may have simply stowed away
aboard a Martian ship, though how they survived such an
extended flight remains a mystery.
How advanced are the Thoth? Nobody is entirely sure. Their
architecture is impressive, even given the lower gravity of the
planet, and their success in building more atomic blasts suggests
considerable engineering skill. Most Thoth equipment, including
their guns and ammunition, is hand-crafted in small workshops,
not factories, but while they seem simple their “simplicity” is
actually evidence of good design, and seems to be standardised
to a remarkable extent. A gun built near one of the poles can
exchange parts and ammunition with one built at the equator.
Although many aspects of Thoth society and personality are
still mysterious, they are avid consumers of Terran animated
films and seem to be in awe of certain characters, most notably
Warner Brothers’ “Road Runner” and to a lesser extent
Universal’s “Woody Woodpecker”. There are obvious reasons
for their love of these characters; they are vaguely similar in
body form to the Martians, and some of the behaviour shown in
these cartoons looks a little like the fast erratic movement of a
Martian. Within months of the first cartoon screening on Mars it
was noticed that Martians had begun to use the word-sound
“beep-beep” for extra emphasis.
It was initially thought that the Thoth might be worshipping
these characters as gods, but there is ample evidence that they
understand the animation process, and realise that the characters
are human creations. In 2076 a Thoth known as Ch’tiiiiir visited
Earth; while in Washington it gave the Smithsonian institution
fifty-six pictures which were eventually deciphered as a crude
“storyboard” outline for a film based on the characters, in which
Wile E. Coyote chases the Road Runner to Mars, falls into a
series of traps based on peculiarities of the Martian environment,
and is ultimately eaten by a Dream Beast, which he sees as an
attractive female coyote. The Institutution contacted Warner
Brothers and arranged to have the aimation made, with Ch’tiiiiir
witnessing the production process from beginning to end. The
cartoon was popular enough that several more cartoons have
been made with a Martian setting, which often appear on
children’s television programmes. This has helped to reinforce
the idea of the Martians as the friends of humanity.

The Thoth (continued)

Despite nearly a century of
colonization Martians and humans still
suffer from immense communications
difficulties. Most concepts seems to
involve elaborate mime and huge
amounts of guesswork. It’s very
frustrating for linguists.
The Thoth see humans as clumsy,
over-muscled, slightly stupid clowns.
There’s nothing cruel in this; humans
can’t see the fun in leaping into the air
and landing head-first, understand
Martian logic, and so forth. Thoth like
to play linguistic games, so most
conversations tend to be a mixture of
Martian, pidgin English, and mime.
This game is rarely abandoned entirely,
even in life-threatening emergencies,
and no Martian would dream of
explaining the rules to a human. It will
be more fun if humans work it out for
themselves!
Thoth player characters should be built
on 25 points, and begin with no
knowledge of human languages or skills.
Chk’Treeeee - ATypical Thoth
BODY 4, MIND 6, SOUL 4
Beak, Effect 6 A:B/F, B:F/I, C:I
Kick, Effect 9, A:F, B:I, C:I/C
Pistol, Effect 6, A:F, B:I, C:C/K *
* The pistol fires 128 poison darts;
the poison is harmless to humans but
the darts can still do serious damage.
The poison adds Effect 4+1/round
if used against Martian organisms.
Skills: Athlete 8 (Jump only), Brawling
5, First Aid (Thoth only) 7, Linguist
(English) 1, Marksman 7, Mechanic 9,
Scientist (Engineering) 9
Quote: “Wreeble ktok atomic blast
beep-beep.” [waves arms excitedly]
Notes: Chk’Treeeee is a descendent of
“Tweel,” the first Martian to contact
humans, and shares its ancestor’s
interest in alien life forms. It regards
itself as a student of human nature and
occasionally
tests
humans
with
situations where it appears to be in
danger, visual puns, and so forth.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 41 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Other Martians

A ‘mound builder’ gathers vegetation for
its colony’s nest
My First Book of Mars (Puffin 2026)

Mound Builder

BODY 5, MIND 1, SOUL 1
Pincers, Effect 4 (x4) A:B, B:F, C:I
Darts, Effect 5, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Skills: Brawling 4, Marksmanship 4
Quote: “'We are v-r-r-riends! Ouch!”
Notes: Lone mound builders are not in
themselves intelligent or particularly
dangerous, but if disturbed will attack in
very large numbers and swamp their
enemy under sheer weight of numbers.
They appear to be indifferent to death
or injury. They are normally unarmed,
but their mounds contain stocks of
metal darts for use against intruders.

False-colour infra-red photograph of the
rat-like Martian species. The distribution of
heat (red) and cold (blue) shows that they
are warm-blooded, which implies that they
could adapt to a warmer climate.
Scientific American

Pseudo-Rat

BODY 2, MIND 2, SOUL 1
Bite, Effect 4 A:F, B:F, C:I
Skills: Brawling 3
Quote: “Squeak!!”
Notes: These creatures look like large
rats with capes, but appearances can be
deceptive; they attack intelligently and
in packs, and delight in leading their
“enemies” into pits, deadfalls, and
other hazards.

While we generally think of the canal–building Thoth as “the
Martians” several other Martian species show signs of
intelligence. The most notable are, of course, the mound
builders described above. They are tool-makers and seem to
demonstrate telepathy, in the form of a communal hive mind,
but their large head diaphragms suggest that they can hear
noises well outside the range audible to humans. It’s possible
that this ability is actually continuous communication at
frequencies humans cannot hear; more work is needed. They
appear to be unable to communicate with other species, but are
excellent mimics and cooperate with the canal-builders to keep
the canals operating, although it may be that they do so by
instinct. They are generally considered harmless if undisturbed,
but Jarvis’s account of a mound builder attack following his
theft of a cancer-curing crystal shows just how dangerous they
can be if provoked. In some respects they seem to be the most
successful species on Mars, with colonies more widely spread
than the Thoth cities, but observation suggests that many of the
more isolated colonies are stagnating, with the population
declining in response to dwindling supplies of the vegetation
used as fertilizer in their mounds. The mounds in proximity to
Thoth cities seem to be the most successful, reinforcing the idea
that the species are to some extent dependent upon one
another.
The caped rat-like species found in the ruined Martian cities
shows disturbing signs of a degree of malevolent intelligence and
are capable of bipedal locomotion. They are now known to be
related to the ‘Slinkers’ of Io, their distant ancestors probably
spread from one world to another by the early Martian
explorers. They are larger and considerably less intelligent than
their relatives on Io. Their size is probably an adaptation to
conditions on Mars, which is considerably colder than Io and has
stronger gravity. They are true animals, not the usual Martian
plant-animal hybrids, warm-blooded, and omnivorous.
The exact relationship between these creatures and the
Thoth is still unclear. It’s apparent that the Thoth regard them
as unwelcome visitors to their cities, but seem to be unwilling to
do anything to exterminate them. They have been seen to
handle Thoth personal belonging and books, but there is no
evidence that they actually damage them. The Thoth resent
their presence, but do not harm them.
Some ethnologists have speculated that the Thoth consider
them to be holy, comparing them to the sacred animals found
in India, Ceylon, and elsewhere on Earth; in particular, to the
monkeys that roam free in some villages. Further research is
needed.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 42 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The dream beasts use illusions to lure victims into striking
range. While the mechanics of this process are far from clear,
there is every reason to believe that it requires some intelligence,
although in the case of the ‘dream beasts’ dissection has found
no brains as such. Neural matter is distributed throughout the
body, as in the hydrozoa these creatures resemble.

Life on Mars
While most attention has naturally been devoted to the sentient
species of Mars, the planet has many other species.
It is believed that all of the native Martian species are
Areobiota, the hybrid plant-animals described above, but it
should be emphasised that many species have yet to be
examined; Mars may still hold some surprises.
There are virtually no free-living Martian microorganisms, and
the first explorers believed that there were none. In fact the
harsh conditions and the presence of peroxides in much of the
soil mean that most microorganisms are symbiotic with more
advanced life forms, carried in root nodules and other
specialised organs. The nodules protect the bacteria; in return
they help their hosts to break down organic debris and use it as
food. In the event of death these organisms will eventually
destroy the corpse, but it can take several days for this process
to start, one of the reasons for the erroneous reports of a
bacteria-free world.
Biopods are the most basic of the higher organisms. They
produce energy by photosynthesis1 and find water and the
minerals they need for growth by
“walking” on their tendril-like roots, which
are tipped with fine hooks and hairs. The
contractile tissue is similar in structure to
the muscles of Terrestrial animals, though
the chemical process is different. When a
source of nutrients is found, rapidlygrowing root-hairs burrow into the soil.
Since this process requires considerable
A specimen of Martian
energy, biopods always move out of
‘Walking Grass’ grows
shadows – reduced photosynthesis in the
in a refrigerated dish
coiled roots causes them to slacken, so that
of nutrient gel.
tension in another root moves the plant
Kew Gardens, London
into the light.
This was initially misinterpreted as a directed flight
mechanism, since they seem to move away from danger, but in
fact they simply move out of the shadow of the thing that
endangers them.
1

Their green photosynthetic pigment is not chlorophyll, but a chemical similar
to the xanthophylls found in algae on Earth.

A young Dream Beast extends its fanged
tentacles and mouths.
Time-Life 2027

Dream Beast

BODY 5, MIND 1, SOUL 1
Wrestle, effect 5, A:F, B:F/I, C:I
2-4 Bites, Effect 7, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Skills: Brawling 5, Hypnosis 6
Quote: Notes: This creature induces believable
hallucinations of something or someone
the victim particularly desires if its
Hypnosis overcomes the MIND of the
victim. Once the victim is close it
attacks with its tentacles and multiple
mouths. Victims of multiple dream
beasts may see multiple hallucinations,
which sometimes breaks the illusion.

Adventure Idea:
Dream a Little Dream
Terran organised crime is interested in
the hypnotic power of Dream Beasts,
and there’s a rumoured $50,000
reward for anyone who can bring one
back to Earth, packaged so that it can’t
hurt anyone. If the adventurers can
manage it they’ll be rich. Always
assuming that they know the right
criminals and that the rumour is true…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 43 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The silicon-based pyramid builder eats sand
and excretes “bricks” which are used to build
a protective structure around the creature
inside. Periodically it completes its outer
shell, and almost immediately shatters it to
start anew.
Sketch by Leroy, Ares expedition

Pyramid Builder

BODY 20, MIND 1?, SOUL 1?
No attacks
Skills: Quote: Notes: Pyramid-builders seem to be
completely indifferent to other forms of
life. If their path from an old pyramid
site to a new one is obstructed they
simply climb over the obstruction,
regardless of its size or nature. Since they
are essentially living rocks they are
immune to most physical attacks; even
small quantities of explosive have failed
to elicit any reaction. In view of their
rarity such extreme experiments are now
banned under colonial law.

These basic processes are easily seen in the simplest biopod,
‘Walking Grass’; If the above-ground portion of any root is
suddenly cast into shadow the hooks disengage and the plant
literally springs an inch or two in a random direction, repeating
the process until at least one root is in sunlight. They seem to
be able to distinguish between shadow and nightfall, and do not
continue hopping at night.
More advanced biopods resemble tumbleweeds with some
control over their travels, mobile shrubbery, and the ‘hopping
mushrooms’ made famous by Disney’s live-action Fantasia IV.
Some of these species are sensitive to touch, vibrations, etc. as
well as light and the presence of water and nutrient elements.
No discussion of Martian life can be complete without
mention of the enigmatic “pyramid-builders,” immensely longlived silicate life-forms. Only five are known, all at least
20,000 years old, but it’s possible that smaller specimens have
gone unnoticed. Their biology is a mystery; it’s possible to chip
samples from their bodies, but specimens crumble to dust in a
few hours, leaving behind powder made up mainly of
aluminium silicate with traces of other silicates. In summer they
produce glassy gas-filled spheres believed to be eggs or spores;
despite numerous tests none have ever been persuaded to
“hatch.” Further investigation is needed.
It may be that they are not native to Mars; a silicon species
has been reported on Ganymede, but very little is known about
it. It is unlikely that they were imported by the ancient
Martians, since some of their pyramids are older than the
earliest likely date for Martian space travel.

Pyramidology
Contact with alien worlds sometimes has odd results; one has been a revival of interest in the 19th century fad for
pyramidology, theories which claim that the pyramids of Egypt (and sometimes Mexico etc.) have immense
symbolic and mystical significance, above and beyond their status as tombs. Details such as their precise
dimensions are believed to predict the future, sharpen razor blades, or have other occult significance.
The revised theory claims that the pyramid-builders of Mars are the larval form of an advanced space-faring
race which lays its eggs on planets, builds a series of ever-larger pyramids until it is ready to pupate, then spends
thousands of years slowly changing to its adult form, buried deep below its final pyramid. Eventually the adult will
emerge, possibly helped by its parents returning from space, and begin the cycle anew. They laid eggs on Earth
hundreds of thousands of years ago. Humans, having long forgotten this ancient truth, adapted the upper levels
of their pyramids as tombs and temples, unaware of the sleeping colossi that will eventually emerge. Needless to
say there are numerous flaws in this theory, but nothing that a true believer can’t explain away or ignore, and it’s
popular enough to have inspired numerous books and at least one vision series.
Exactly how the adventurers get involved in this is up to the referee. For example, it might be part of an
eccentric adventurer’s back-story, a reason for them to be in space. Adherents of the theory might charter a
flight to Mars to visit one of the active pyramid-builders, or plan an expedition to the outer planets or the
asteroids to look for the spacefaring adults or more pyramids. The adventurers might discover a more sinister
version of the cult, or a scam that is using it to raise money for organised crime. Or it might turn out to be
true... Whatever you choose, keep the adventurers guessing!
Suggested by Brian Ameringen

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 44 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The lair of the Red Peri remained a mystery, though
League ships scoured asteroids, the far side of the
desolate Moon, and even the diminutive satellites of
Mars.
The Red Peri

The Asteroids: Cosmic Rubble
Most explorers regard the asteroids as a dangerous
nuisance; navigation in any asteroid field is difficult and
dangerous, with meteors and other space debris a small
but constant threat. League ships have surveyed some of
the larger asteroids during piracy suppression operations,
but most are only known as dots on photographic plates.
The chart shows positions in January 2115; in this view
the planets and asteroids orbit in an anticlockwise
direction.
Astronomers believe that one of the early proto-planets was ripped apart by the gravity of the newlyformed Jupiter, forming hundreds of small bodies rather than a single planet. Early theorists thought that
Ceres, the largest and most spherical asteroid, was the core of the proto-planet, but exploration suggests
that it is simply the largest fragment, and is made mostly of water ice with an outer layer of rocky dust.
The first four asteroids discovered, and the best known, are the “classic” asteroids; Ceres, Vesta, Juno,
and Pallas. All are visible from Earth with relatively small telescopes, and easily spotted with shipboard
instruments. Ceres, Vesta and Pallas are the largest asteroids; since their discovery several other asteroids
which are smaller than Vesta but larger than Juno have been discovered, but they are made of dark
carbonates and difficult to find in the darkness of space. All of the asteroids are considerably smaller than
the Moon, with much lower gravity, and have no appreciable atmosphere. However, “smaller” is a
relative term; Ceres is a sphere wider than Texas, its mass several hundred million times that of Mount
Everest.
While the asteroid “belt” is the most familiar location for asteroids, there are two other large swarms;
the Trojans, in Jupiter’s orbit, grouped approximately 60° ahead
of and behind Jupiter, and on average as far from Jupiter as Jupiter
is from the Sun. Asteroids ahead of Jupiter (at the bottom of the
diagram above) are referred to as the ‘Greek camp’, those behind
as the ‘Trojan camp.’ The largest is 624 Hektor, actually a pair of
similarly-sized and roughly spherical asteroids in contact with each
other. Ironically, it was misplaced in the Greek camp, despite its
Trojan name. The Trojan asteroid swarms have a much higher
density of meteors and micro-meteors than the main asteroid belt.
Finally, the asteroids 433 Eros and 1566 Icarus are outliers,
with orbits coming much closer to the Sun than the main asteroid
belt. Eros orbits between 1.78 AU and 1.33 AU, crossing the
orbit of Mars and approaching within 17 million miles of Earth
every 81 years. Icarus is even more extreme, orbiting from 1.97
AU to 0.19 AU and crossing the orbits of all of the inner planets
to approach nearer to the Sun than Mercury.
Data for these asteroids is summarised on the next page.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 45 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Asteroid

Dimensions
(km)

Ceres
Pallas
Juno
Vesta
Hektor
Eros
Icarus

960
570
240
530

Rotation Orbital
period
Period
years
hours

x932 km
x525 km
km spheroid
km spheroid

Two 190km spheres

34 x11x11 km
1.4km irregular

9.08
7.81
7.21
5.34
6.92
5.25
2.26

The Case for the Asteroids
The asteroids contain more metal, in
relatively accessible form, than has been
mined throughout the history of the
human race. Getting at it is simply a
matter of power – and the power of
atomic blasts is steadily increasing as
new technology is developed and comes
into use. Already radium-catalysed
atomic blasts are powerful enough to
melt much more metal than they
consume; the new protactinium-initiator
blasts will have several times more
power. Given the low gravity of the
asteroids, and sufficiently advanced
engines, it ought to be possible to
extract minerals at a fraction of the cost
of conventional mining on Earth or the
other planets; vaporize them, then
purify them by magnetic or electrostatic
separation.
Admittedly the technology is in its
infancy, and most experiments to date
have concentrated on molten rock, not
gases, using centrifuges to separate
metals. But there is nothing intrinsically
impossible about asteroid mining, and
sooner or later it will become the most
cost-effective and pollution-free source
of many of the metals needed by
industry and commerce.
If industry doesn’t appeal, there are
thousands of unexplored worlds out
there. Ceres alone has about an eighth
the surface area of the old USA. Most
of the asteroids have never even been
visited. There could be anything out
there; we’ll never know unless we look.

4.60
4.61
4.36
3.63
11.93
1.76
1.12

Average
distance
from Sun

Orbital
eccentricity

Orbital
inclination
(degrees)

0.0789
0.2299
0.2579
0.0895
0.0240
0.2230
0.8270

10.58
34.84
12.97
7.14
18.19
10.82
22.85

(Earth=1 AU)

2.77 AU
2.77 AU
2.67 AU
2.36 AU
5.10 AU
1.46 AU
1.08 AU

Gravity

0.028g
0.017g
0.012g
0.022g
0.007g
0.0006g
0.0004g

Despite the League’s claims to have “scoured asteroids” for
the Red Peri, it seems likely that in many cases the search
consisted of little more than telescopic observation from a ship on
a very different orbit. Records of only eighteen asteroids are
known to have been updated as a result of this search, all of them
in the main belt.
The largest asteroid, and the most extensively explored, is
Ceres. It consists of a stony core surrounded by an ice / water
layer approximately a hundred kilometres thick (more fresh water
than the entirety of Earth’s ice caps, lakes and rivers), with an
outer crust of carbonaceous rock, a few hundred metres thick,
accumulated from meteoric dust. Water vapour occasionally
reaches the surface, forming transitory areas of frost around
cracks, but soon evaporates into space. Surface minerals include
iron carbonates and clays, which can be used to fuel radium blast
engines, but they’re thoroughly mixed with other minerals, and
extraction of sufficient iron for a flight to one of the habitable
worlds is a difficult and lengthy process. To date no other useful
minerals have been found there.
Although the temperature and pressure inside Ceres should
theoretically keep water frozen, seismology suggests that the ice
layer is a roughly 70:30 mixture of solid ice and supercooled
water (average temperature -20°C), possibly kept liquid by some
sort of natural anti-freeze. There appears to be some circulation
of the liquid component, while the frozen portion is more or less
immobile; the best theory is that the structure is a spongy matrix
of ice containing interconnecting “bubbles” and “veins” of liquid
water a few hundred metres across. The Smithsonian Institution
has announced that it plans to explore the ice layer as soon as a
suitable submersible vessel can be developed.
Pallas is a rocky asteroid whose composition (determined by
spectroscopy – due to its eccentric orbit there have been no
recorded landings) is a mixture of silicates and carbonaceous
chondrites, meteoric rocks containing a mixture of silicates,
oxides and sulphides and varying quantities of water. Its mass

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 46 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Case against the Asteroids
suggests that it lacks a dense core. Chondrites often include
While
explorers have visited Ceres and
simple organic molecules, but samples found on other asteroids
some
of
the other asteroids, there are
and in meteors originating in the asteroid belt contain nothing
major
obstacles
to thorough exploration
especially noteworthy or useful, and there is no real reason to
and exploitation. The most obvious is
expect those of Pallas to be any different.
distance; usually the major asteroids are
There’s reason to believe that many of the iron meteorites
further apart than Earth and Mars, and
landing on the inner planets originated on Juno, a smaller rocky getting to the Trojans needs as much fuel
asteroid composed mainly of iron-bearing silicates. These as a trip to the moons of Jupiter. It’s
meteorites are debris thrown into space by an asteroid collision necessary to match orbital eccentricity
several thousand years ago, which left a hundred-kilometre and inclination to make a landing, which
wide crater. Despite Juno’s eccentric orbit there have been often adds significant fuel costs. Pallas
attempts to exploit the iron, using radium blast engines to melt and Hektor are barely reachable using
the iron out of the ore. Since radium engines break down iron the best modern ships, Icarus will have
there is no shortage of fuel, and there should theoretically be a to wait for protactinium blasts – and
there is unlikely to be much lead in the
good market for iron on Mars.
asteroids to fuel the return journey.
Unfortunately the Martians don’t actually seem to be very
All of the asteroids lack air, and most
interested, preferring glass and lighter metals, while the small lack water; the main exceptions are
number of colonists makes them a very limited market, and Ceres and a few other ice asteroids,
one that generally prefers manufactured goods to raw iron. A none of which have any other readily
few cargoes were sold for modest profits in 2005-10, but not exploitable resources. Without life there
enough to justify continued exploitation in the aftermath of the are none of the exotic biochemicals that
2110 recession. Economists believe that if there is a sustained make the colonisation of Venus and the
recovery it should be worth resuming operations towards the moons of Jupiter worthwhile. Some
end of the decade, taking advantage of Juno’s next conjunction asteroids have marginally worthwhile
mineral resources, but there is nothing
with Jupiter to fly cargoes to its moons as well as to Mars.
that can’t be found more readily, and
Vesta is the heaviest asteroid after Ceres. It consists of a
exploited far more easily, on Earth or
range of stony minerals, most of them dating back to the one of the other worlds. The high
original formation of the solar system, with a nickel-iron core. density of meteors and micro-meteors is
Mining the core would be extremely difficult, and currently also a problem, especially in the Trojans,
there are many more accessible alternatives including Juno and adding insurance costs as well as a small
but real risk of damage to ships.
the mines of Earth.
Of course it’s possible that something
The largest Trojan asteroid is Hektor, actually a twin world
consisting of two roughly spherical asteroids, each about will eventually be found to justify more
190Km across, which orbit around their common centre of intensive exploration, but for now the
gravity. They haven’t been visited, but long-range photographs asteroids are primarily a nuisance which
hinders traffic to the outer planets.
suggest that they may actually
touch at times. They are orbited by a third asteroid, about 15Km across
and 1000Km away, which acts as their moon. Photographs also show
numerous faint glints of light which may be fragments of meteoric rock,
also orbiting Hektor, and possibly debris thrown up by the occasional
collisions of the main pair of asteroids. Some of these fragments may be
large enough to endanger spacecraft.
The asteroid illustrated is Eros, an irregular rock whose orbit lies much
nearer the Sun than most of the main belt asteroids, passing inside the
orbit of Mars, although there is no risk of a collision within the next few
million years. Eros has been visited several times, and is possibly the most
promising candidate for future mining operations, since its rocks contain

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 47 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

relatively high levels of several precious metals; for example, it’s estimated that it contains more gold and
silver than will ever be mined on Earth. However, these metals are thoroughly mixed with the other
minerals that constitute the asteroid, and a hold full of raw ore would barely be worth the expense of a
trip. As with the main belt asteroids, it will be necessary to extract and purify them on site. A factory
ship, the Thomas Bessemer, was commissioned for this purpose by the Interplanetary Corporation in
2111, but vanished en route to Eros in 2113. It’s suspected that the Red Peri may have captured it.
Another inner system asteroid is Icarus, one of the so-called Apollo asteroids whose orbit crosses those
of Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars. Its orbit is both eccentric and inclined to the plane of the Ecliptic,
making an expedition very unlikely at any time in the near future – even the next generation protactinium
engines would have difficulty coping with the huge velocity and angular changes. Although there is no
reason to believe that Icarus is in any other way remarkable, this inaccessibility has naturally led to
suggestions that it might be the hiding place of the Red Peri…

Adventure Idea: Make Money Fast…

Whenever a ship vanishes it’s rumoured that the Red Peri or another pirate must have captured it. In the case of the
Thomas Bessemer this theory is incorrect; the officers and crew committed barratry (see page 80), “borrowing” the
ship from its rightful owners and taking it to a different asteroid.
The Bessemer is equipped to reduce rock to white-hot gases, and separate them electromagnetically. If the crew
had followed the original mission profile they would have returned to Earth after a few months with a hold full of
uranium and other useful metals. The crew decided to simplify the process; they’re concentrating on collecting gold,
plus just enough uranium and sodium to fuel the atomic blasts. The drawback is that gold isn’t a major component
of asteroid rocks, and collecting it is taking much longer than anticipated – two years after they stole the ship
supplies are running low, they only have about half as much gold as they can carry, and there are signs that they are
close to exhausting the main ore lodes of the asteroid.
It’s time to move on, either returning to Earth to sell the gold, or finding another asteroid to plunder.
At current values there is enough gold aboard to make everyone very rich, but selling it will be difficult; a
middle-man is needed to broker the sale and legitimise the transaction, and is bound to want the lion’s share of the
profits. The Captain claims to know someone, but is being very cagy about the details. Getting the ship to Earth
without incident may not be entirely straightforward; the Bessemer is a large and distinctively designed ship, and will
be recognized immediately if it is spotted by a League patrol ship or Earth’s authorities.
Finding another metal-rich asteroid would be relatively easy, and might allow more time for the ship to be
forgotten, but supplies are a problem; air can be extracted from rock, but food and many other everyday items
(such as clothing and toilet paper) are impossible to synthesise with the equipment aboard the Bessemer. It might be
possible to land on Earth and buy them, but sneaking in and out without detection would be difficult, and the
captain suspects that the crew will mutiny and take the gold if he tried it.
There’s one obvious solution – intercept a freighter or liner soon after it leaves Earth and “liberate” its supplies.
But that’s an act of piracy, which so far the Bessemer has avoided; stealing the ship (or rather diverting it from its
original mission) is a moderately serious criminal offence attracting a few years of imprisonment, piracy often carries
the death penalty. Everyone aboard is aware of the distinction and reluctant to go that route.
There’s one thing everyone aboard the Bessemer has overlooked – the value of gold only remains stable so long
as no new cheap sources appear. If it becomes public knowledge that it’s possible to produce hundreds of tons this
easily, the price will plummet. Powerful forces in government and the financial world will go to almost any lengths to
ensure that this does not happen.
Exactly how the adventurers become involved in this is left open – they might be members of the crew, or
members of the crew of a ship that runs into or is intercepted by the Bessemer. In an Earth-based campaign they
might work for the Captain’s black-market contacts, or might be police assigned to track them down. In a League of
Nations Patrol campaign they might be sent to search for the Bessemer, or have to rescue another ship the Bessemer
has attacked. One interesting approach is to give a Patrol crew the job of capturing the Bessemer, then conduct the
Board of Enquiry, an in-depth review of everything that went wrong (or right) with their mission, with the players
taking on the additional roles of lawyers for the ship owners, the crew of the Bessemer, and the Patrol itself.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 48 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

…he had visualized Io as something like Titan, cold but clean.
Instead it was as hot as the Venus Hotlands because of its glowing primary, and subject to half a dozen
different forms of steamy daylight—sun day, Jovian day, Jovian and sun day, Europa light, and occasionally
actual and dismal night. And most of these came in the course of Io’s forty-two-hour revolution,
too—a mad succession of changing lights.
The Mad Moon
Europa, like the Moon, keeps one face always toward its primary. Here in this vast
depression, all of the tiny world’s scanty atmosphere is collected, gathered like little
lakes and puddles into the valleys between mountain ranges that often pierce
through the low-lying air into the emptiness of space.
Often enough a single valley forms a microcosm sundered by
nothingness from the rest of the planet, generating its own little
rainstorms under pygmy cloud banks, inhabited by its indigenous life,
untouched by, and unaware of, all else.
Redemption Cairn
Jupiter shone pale and ghostlike in the night sky and far off, a tiny
pinprick in the black, was Earth… …A few land leets, disturbed by
their presence, dragged themselves slowly from the rock.
Amherst, who always preferred fresh food to the concentrates
of his kit, caught and cooked them in the ray stove for dinner.
The octopus-like animals were good eating…
Tidal Moon
Europa

Io

Callisto

Ganymede

Jupiter’s moons to approximate scale

Jupiter: King of the Planets
A solar system in miniature, Jupiter has more than twice the
mass of the other planets combined, and is orbited by dozens
of moons, most notably the four classic Galilean satellites; Io,
Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. Jupiter itself is uninhabitable; a
gas giant whose heat and pressure will destroy any ship, with
gravity strong enough to trap any vessel that ventures much closer
than the orbit of Io, periodically bombarded by asteroids and comets
sucked in by its gravity, wracked by gigantic magnetic storms whose
static makes radio communication difficult for millions of miles around.
However, these properties combine to make the inner Galilean moons
habitable – Jupiter radiates enough heat to give life a chance, and the moons
are stressed by tidal forces, leading to volcanism and renewal of their atmospheres.
As a result Io has a positively tropical climate, Europa has temperate microclimates,
and survival on Ganymede requires little more than warm clothing. Callisto has no known
life and only traces of an atmosphere, and is covered in a layer of ice several miles thick, but
exploration has been minimal and it is possible that something has been missed. The four minor moons
closer to Jupiter are tiny baked airless hells, the outer fifty or so are airless and perpetually frozen –
essentially they are captured asteroids, mostly less than a hundred kilometres across, in highly eccentric

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 49 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

orbits, destined to circle Jupiter for a few hundred thousand years before gravitational forces rip them
apart or throw them into Jupiter’s atmosphere or into the depths of space. A few have been explored,
but little of interest has been found. They are accompanied by swarms of meteors and fine meteoric dust,
effectively forming a miniature asteroid belt. The outer belt is so dusty that it forms faint rings around
Jupiter, but they are virtually invisible from the equatorial plane occupied by all of the major moons.
Orbital radius
(AU)
5.2

Orbital
Period (years)
11.86

Gravity
Earth=1
2.5

Day

Atmosphere

Jupiter

Diameter
km
143000

9hr 54m

Hydrogen, helium, trace gases

Major
moons
Io
Europa
Ganymede
Callisto

Diameter
km
3660
3121
5262
4820

Orbital radius
(km)
421,800
671,100
1,070,400
1,882,700

Orbital
Period (days)
1.77
3.55
7.16
16.69

Gravity
Earth=1
0.33
0.13
0.52
0.13

Day

Atmosphere

21 hrs.
3.55 days
6.5 days
16.69 days

Oxygen, nitrogen, methane1
Oxygen, nitrogen
Oxygen, nitrogen, ammonia1
None

Europa and Callisto are tidally locked, with one face constantly turned towards Jupiter. Io rotates at
double its orbital speed, so that from its surface Jupiter appears to rise, set, and rise again once for each
orbit, an apparent day of 42 hours; this is caused by orbital resonance, another form of tidal locking2.
Ganymede’s day is a little shorter than its orbital period, so that it rotates once every six months relative
to Jupiter. Massive tides sweep around the moon in time with its rotation. The orbits of the inner three
Galilean moons are also gravitationally locked in 4:2:1 resonance; one Ganymede orbit takes as long as
two orbits of Europa or four of Io. Occasional alignments of these moons can be another cause of high
tides on Ganymede.

Warmed by the immense heat of Jupiter, Io’s equatorial jungles have been
compared unfavourably with those of Cambodia or the Venusian Hotlands,
but opinion is divided as to which is worse.
There are temperate conditions within 20° of the poles (references to
this limit as the ‘twentieth parallel’ are incorrect but unfortunately very
common; it is actually the seventieth parallel3). These temperate zones are
larger than they might at first appear; each has an area of about a third of a
million square miles, but much of this area is rocky volcanic barrens. There
are two polar cities; Junopolis at the North Pole and Herapolis at the
South. Communication between these cities is by rocket or winged aircraft,
flight is complicated by dense cloud and mountain ranges which extend
beyond the atmosphere. Radio is almost useless, due to interference from Jupiter’s constant electrical
storms. Jupiter looms huge in the sky, more than 19º wide; by comparison, Earth’s moon covers 0.6º
1

2

3

Io is described differently in different stories, and there are inconsistencies within the most authoritative source, The Mad Moon.
Briefly, this story describes Io as a tropical environment requiring no special protective equipment; but Tidal Moon describes the
atmosphere of Io as “mostly methane” and mentions that the atmosphere of Ganymede contains ammonia. For game purposes
Io’s atmosphere contains methane traces as a greenhouse gas, too dilute to pose problems for human visitors.
The Mad Moon states that Io’s day is 42 hours, the same as its orbital period. This implies tidal locking – but Weinbaum also
describes Jupiter rising and setting in the sky. The best explanation is that Io spins twice as fast as it orbits Jupiter, so that its
day relative to Jupiter is 42 hours.
If the geography described in The Mad Moon is taken literally, Io’s tropics are small and the temperate zones are larger than the
USA, but it’s obvious that this is not what was intended. Confusion over parallels seems the most likely explanation – the main
protagonist of The Mad Moon is delirious for much of the story!

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 50 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Io from Space - National Geographic 2086

Io: The Jungle Moon

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The denser parts of the jungle are lethally dangerous to
humans; there are several deadly plant species, most notably
stinging palms (whose leaves are edged with scores of poisontipped spikes), spike-tipped arrow vines, giant venomous
carnivorous worms known as “toothers,” and corrosive bullethead frogs:
Weapon
Effect
A B C
Spikes1
6+1D6 poison
F I C/K
Fangs1
4+1D6 poison
F I I
Fangs2
12+2D6 poison I C K
Fangs2
9+1D6 poison
F I C/K
acid spray3 3D6 poison
F I I/C
2
Attacks with Brawling 4.
Attacks with Brawling 8.
Attacks with Marksmanship 8, Acid spray, cone 3ft radius, causes burns
to skin etc., critical injuries can include blindness.

Stinging Palms
Arrow Vine
Toother
Bullet-headed Frog
1
3

BODY
12
6
16
12

Elsewhere the main hazards are White Fever (see side text)
and the malicious slinkers, intelligent rat-sized nuisances living in
“villages” which they are willing to defend to the death.
Io’s main export is ferva leaves, which contain a range of
medical alkaloids. In their crudest form the leaves can be chewed
to combat the effects of blancha, but chemical processing
converts the raw leaves into a wide variety of medical alkaloids –
ferverin, which is ironically most useful on Io for treating the
effects of blancha, and a much wider range of painkillers and
anti-inflammatory drugs useful in alleviating the effects of a wide
variety of illnesses including the common cold and influenza.
Care must be taken in the use of these drugs, especially the raw
leave, since they also have euphoric and hallucinogenic effects.
Currently most of the leaves that are exported are collected
by one of the native species, the so-called Loonies, but recently
Neilan Drug began to cultivate the plants in cleared plantations at
the polar edges of the jungle, with encouraging results. It’s
anticipated that prices will fall as production increases, but new
markets and uses should easily make up the loss.
While Neilan Drug specialises in ferva leaves and their
derivatives, their smaller rival Ionian Products (primarily a skin
exporter) has found red Cree moss growing in the temperate
zones, and hopes to duplicate the process pioneered by Cree Inc.
of Ganymede, which converts worthless red moss to medicinally
valuable blue.1 Most experts believe that there is little hope of
success, since the blue moss is affected by Ganymede’s
atmospheric chemistry and unique insect life, neither of which
can readily be adapted to Io’s conditions. It’s predicted that
Ionian Products will either abandon the project or form some
sort of partnership with Cree Inc., exporting moss to Ganymede
for final processing.
1

Tidal Moon

Blancha (White Fever)
Blancha, or white fever, is the most
common illness on Io, affecting most
visitors to the tropics of the moon. Its
effects most closely resemble those of
malaria, with similar causes, and include
nausea and hallucinations.
The main vector for the disease is the
virtually microscopic swamp midge,
smaller than the mosquitoes of Earth and
almost impossible to keep out of
clothing, huts, etc. They swarm in large
numbers whenever they feel a ground
disturbance that might indicate the
presence of an animal whose blood is
worth sucking.
Their saliva is infected with a miocroorganism very similar to plasmodium
vivax, the malaria parasite, but its life
cycle is far less predictable – bouts of
fever can last from a few hours to several
days, and the period between bouts is
also very variable.
The disease is rarely fatal, but chronic
infection can lead to permanent neural
damage similar to multiple sclerosis.
Studies of the native loonies show
that most are infected with the parasites,
but seem not to be greatly affected by it.
Slinkers appear to be relatively immune.

Sleep Deprivation

Io’s confusing day-night cycle can cause
disrupted sleep patterns and associated
medical and psychological problems.
When combined with blancha the effects
can include apparently lucid dreams,
vivid hallucinations and sleepwalking.

Vitamin Deficiencies

Visitors to Io (and the other Galilean
moons) should be alert for vitamin C
and D shortages; Io’s plants and animals
do not produce either vitamin, and
Jupiter receives insufficient sunlight for
vitamin D to form in the skin, even in
the equatorial zone. The polar cities have
artificial solariums and farms with fullspectrum lighting to grow terrestrial
plants, but these facilities aren’t available
elsewhere, and residents must be sure to
keep a good stock of diet supplements.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 51 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Io has two native “intelligent” species, but the intelligence of
both is a matter of debate and prejudice.
…The loonies—Lunae Jovis Magnicapites, or literally, Bigheads of
Jupiter’s Moon—backed away, giggling plaintively. Beyond doubt,
they considered Grant fully as idiotic as he considered them, and
were quite unable to understand the reasons for his anger. But they
certainly realized that no candy was to be forthcoming, and their
giggles took on a note of keen disappointment.
So keen, indeed, that the leader, after twisting his ridiculous blue
face in an imbecilic grin at Grant, voiced a last wild giggle and dashed
his head against a glittering stone-bark tree. His companions casually
picked up his body and moved off, with his head dragging behind
them on its neck like a prisoner’s ball on a chain. The Mad Moon

A typical Loony jumps with excitement when
offered candy
Pearson’s Magazine 2103

Loony
BODY 3, MIND 1, SOUL 2
No attacks
Skills: Linguist 1(?)
Quote: “Canny!” (giggles idiotically)
Notes: Adult Loonies are about nine
feet tall including their heads and necks.
They are vegetarians and reproduce
sexually, the females laying large eggs
which are incubated by both parents.
The adults have few natural predators,
but Slinkers have been seeing smashing
and eating their eggs. There is evidence
that there was once a relatively advanced
Loony civilization, and that the Loonies
still dimly remember it, but whatever
spark of greatness they once had is long
gone.
Role Playing: Loonies are profoundly
stupid and should be played mainly for
comic effect, with an edge of pathos.
They have little or no “common sense”
and seem to lack basic survival instincts;
they often die through stupid accidents
or by apparently deliberate but
motiveless suicide. They like candy and
occasionally manage to obey very simple
commands to get it, but are more likely
to misunderstand completely.

The childish loonies were until recently considered to be a
race that had never evolved true intelligence, but the discovery
of an abandoned loony city in the Idiot’s Hills suggests that they
have instead regressed from more human levels of intelligence.
Exactly why this occurred is open to question, since there does
not appear to have been any sudden change in conditions on Io.
There is no evidence of war. One theory is that as the loony
civilisation expanded they were unexpectedly exposed to blancha
fever for the first time, and suffered a pandemic which
obliterated most of the race and left a tiny number of survivors,
inbred to such an extent that hereditary idiocy became the
dominant genetic trait. A related theory suggests that their
behaviour is a drugged response to the disease plus heavy
consumption of ferva leaves. The most plausible theory,
however, suggests that their decline is linked to the rise of the
rat-like omnivorous slinkers, which have been seen to eat their
eggs. It’s hoped that future archaeological work will provide
more information.
A minority and somewhat far-fetched theory suggests that the
loonies are actually considerably more intelligent than they
appear, and are faking their stupidity to discourage human
contact. There is little evidence to support the hypothesis, and
some aspects of their behaviour, most notably their indifference
to their own safety, argue against it.
A variant of this theory, popular amongst certain circles on
Earth, suggests that the human colonists are somehow responsible
for their lack of intelligence, or greatly exaggerate it, to excuse
their “theft” of loony lands. It would be tedious to list all the
flaws in this argument; all explorers and colonists agree that
loony behaviour has changed little since the first landings, and
that the loonies have no interest in the polar regions, the most
habitable parts of the moon, preferring to stay in the jungle.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 52 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

“…They learn so quickly, and they breed like flies. Suppose
they pick up the use of gas, or suppose they develop little rifles
for their poisonous darts. That’s possible, because they work in
metals right now, and they know fire. That would put them
practically on a par with man as far as offense goes, for what good
are our giant cannons and rocket planes against six-inch slinkers?
And to be just on even terms would be fatal; one slinker for one
man would be a hell of a trade.”
The Mad Moon
The slinkers (Mus Sapiens) have been described as exhibiting
“pseudo-intelligence,” but this term is a misnomer, usually
used to condone their mistreatment; slinker intelligence is very
real. Their civilization includes agriculture (with a field system
which suggests that they understand crop rotation), metalwork, crude chemistry, and an obvious ability to make plans
for activities such as raids against human targets. They mostly
appear to be indifferent to humans, or regard them as a target
for theft and cruel jokes, but react violently to any intrusion on
the areas they control. Naturally they have good reason – they
are tiny compared to humans, and dozens of lives might be
taken by a human who blunders through a village without
regard for its buildings and inhabitants. The League regards the
situation with some concern, and hopes that as ferva
production moves to a plantation system and to the edges of
the jungle there will be less cause for humans to disturb slinker
settlements.
One unanswered question is the degree of cooperation
between slinker villages. Most evidence suggests that in general
they handle their own affairs, without concern for a wider
slinker community. Should they begin to unite against humans
and develop higher technology it is possible that they would be
able to drive the colonists from the jungle completely, or even
force a complete evacuation of Io.
Numerous “experts” have commented on the association
between the slinkers and the decadent loonies, and the similar
association between the related Martian species and the
decadent Thoth, suggesting that they might in some way be
responsible for the downfall of these civilisations. This seems
highly unlikely – while the exact cause of the loonies decline is
unknown, the Martian decline is clearly related to a lack of
resources and deliberate population reduction, and is already
reversing as the Martians begin to use atomic power. There is
evidently some animosity between the Thoth and the Martian
subspecies of Mus sapiens, but this seems unlikely to be the
cause. Despite this the League has ruled that these species may
not be transported from their respective worlds, for fear that
they might one day reach Earth and become a serious pest.

A slinker, its crude sword partially concealed by
its “cape” of fur-covered skin and held in place
by a belt of woven plant fibres.
Scientific American 2079

Slinker

BODY 1, MIND 2, SOUL 2
Bite, Effect 2, A:F, B:F, C:F/I
Sword, Effect 3, A:F, B:F, C:I
Dart, Effect 1, A:F, B:F, C:F, plus poison
Effect 1+1/round, A:F, B:F, C:I
Skills: Athlete (run, climb) 3, Brawling 2,
Mechanic 2, Marksmanship 3, Melee
weapon 2, Stealth 8, Thief 4
Equipment: Knife, poison darts
Quote: “Squeek!”
Notes: The skills shown are for a typical
slinker that might be encountered hunting;
in their villages there are also farmers,
smiths, and other more specialised workers,
and for all that is known to the contrary
there may be equivalents of doctors,
scholars, scientists etc.
Little is known of slinker society, but
their technology and behaviour suggests
that they have reached medieval levels of
organization, science and technology, and
may have progressed further. They actively
pursue intruders that damage their villages,
and may be developing more powerful
weapons to deal with the threat they
perceive from human interlopers.
Role Playing: Generally slinkers are not a
serious threat, but if they are hurt or their
homes are threatened they become
vindictive and very dangerous. Run them in
pairs and small groups at first, then hit
human characters with an army of dozens
or hundreds, possibly armed with spears as
well as darts, if they don’t take care.
Although they have short lives the arms
race between humans and slinkers will
evolve over years, not days, and their
weapons won’t change much in the course
of an adventure (but see below).

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 53 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Recent papers in the Journal of Life Studies1 suggest that Earth may have had a lucky escape; if slinkers
were indeed spread to other worlds by a prehistoric Martian expedition, Earth’s relatively high gravity
plus the presence of domesticated cats in Egypt may have prevented infestation – unable to attain their
normal speeds, the slinkers would have been easy prey for cats and other predators. It may not be
entirely coincidental that the origins of Egyptian cat-worship can be traced to the approximate period of
Martian exploration.

Adventure Idea: Arms Race
…he knew that a tiny slinker village was over in that direction, for once he had glimpsed the neat little buildings,
constructed of small, perfectly fitted stones like a miniature medieval town, complete to towers and battlements. It was
said that there were even slinker wars.
The Mad Moon
The slinkers have a plan. They see the human colonists as a threat and plan to deal with them, as they previously
dealt with the loonies. But humans are a tougher proposition than the relatively fragile loonies (who were virtually
wiped out by the slinkers systematically spreading disease to their food and destroying their medical supplies). This
time they’re going to have to resort to direct violence. They’re going to have to think big – and some slinker genius
comes up with the idea of giant steam-powered mecha… The term ‘giant’ is relative, initially they’ll be about 3ft tall
and armed with relatively small steam-powered guns. But with each generation they’ll get bigger and nastier.
Exactly how the players get involved is up to you – they might be:
• League of Nations marines or civilian mercenaries brought in to pacify Io at colossal expense, but fighting at
the wrong end of a ridiculously long supply line.
• Civilians caught up in the war and trying to reach the poles for evacuation off-world.
• Space-crew trying to organise the evacuation to one of the other Jovian moons and finding more of a slinker
threat with every flight. And of course having to deal with occasional slinker stowaways, odious colonial
officials and plantation owners, etc.
• Diplomats or scientists trying to find a peaceful solution (good luck with that one…)
See Forgotten Futures IX for some simple automaton design rules – for the purposes of this scenario the resources
available to the slinkers are represented by a cash budget. Substitute slinker pilots, gunners, etc. for the mechanical
“brains” etc. they mention, with controls and passenger space costing about half as much as the equivalent brain and
program cylinders. Start off with a budget of say £25 per village for the initial designs, escalating to £50 after 1D6
Io days, £75 after another 1D6 days, and so on. Of course there are a LOT of slinker villages, and they’ll all have
their own ideas – one may build a single “giant” machine, another several smaller models. Any technology they can
steal will be incorporated – after a while some of the mecha will have flame pistols and fully-sized guns, eventually
some may be atomic powered or fly. Don’t be afraid to get silly!
Useful references here are the films Apocalypse Now, Alien(s) and Starship Troopers, the TV series Battlestar
Galactica, Larry Niven’s The Mote In God’s Eye, and books about the Vietnam war, jungle warfare, etc.

One other Ionian species should be mentioned – parcats are roughly catsized animals with one rear leg and two front paws. They are excellent
mimics and, like parrots, can be trained to learn simple phrases (and often
pick them up after hearing them once). They are not intelligent or
dangerous, and have no other useful skills, but happily live on table scraps
and basic vegetable foods, eat insects and other pests (but avoid slinkers)
and can easily be house trained. They can’t adapt to conditions on Earth or
Venus, the gravity is too strong, but they thrive in free fall and are a good
pet for spacemen and colonists on low-gravity worlds and moons.
Parcat foraging for food scraps
Saturday Evening Post 2099
1

Most notably Limiting Factors in the Spread of Mus Sapiens by Nicoll, Jordan, et al.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 54 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Europa: Small Edens
Tidally locked to Jupiter, Europa is the smallest of the Galilean satellites, and
in many ways the strangest. The surface is airless, but the side of the moon
facing Jupiter is marked by an enormous depression (covering about 30% of
Europa’s surface) containing dozens of small deep air-filled valleys separated
by mountain ranges. The valleys are home to a startling variety of plant and
animal species, and have been compared to the Galapagos Islands as an
example of evolution in action. The terrain is constantly disturbed by quakes,
tidal forces, and other geological phenomena, and the valleys occasionally
merge then separate again over a few years or decades. Biologists have
Europa viewed from Io
successfully tracked the evolution of species as they move from one valley to
Herapolis
Observatory, 2102
another, either by crossing the airless peaks or by taking advantage of
temporary gaps caused by these natural forces.
Europan life usually hybridises plant and animal characteristics, in a manner similar to the Areobiota of
Mars. Most “plants” have some animal characteristics, while most “animals” can photosynthesise and
produce some or all of their food from sunlight. All are asexual. To date explorers have found no
dangerous or toxic species and no bacteria harmful to
It’s Life, Jim... But Is It Kosher..?
humans, and it is possible to live on Europan species for
several weeks without ill-effects, although vitamin supplements One of the odd questions to come out of
interplanetary travel is the religious status
are essential. Some examples:
of alien foods. Many faiths have dietary
• Bladder-Birds look like large flying squirrels at low codes, and edible species must be tested to
altitudes, but are able to inflate a large air sac and hold see if they conform. Europa is an extreme
their breath long enough to travel small distances through case because it has so many edible species,
vacuum. Naturally they cannot fly in these airless regions, but the question has vexed clerics and
they must travel on foot. Their “blood” resembles dense scholars since the first landing on Mars. In
sap and doesn’t readily boil at low pressure, which helps the case of Europa, for example, the
Reform Jewish interpretation is as follows:
to prevent decompression illnesses.
• Song-Bushes are inedible but notable for their tinkling • Bladder-Birds are not predators and do
not have cloven hooves or chew cud.
scaly leaves, which rattle in the wind to create a melody
They are Kosher if prepared correctly;
explorers have described as “sweet and plaintive.”
they must be drained of blood and the
Specimens have been grown from seeds at the Botanical
heart, lungs, and air bladder must be
Gardens at Kew, London, but quickly succumbed to
removed as soon as they are killed.1
fungal infections when removed from the laboratory.
• Nutsies are Treif (non-Kosher) since
• Nutsies are aquatic creatures which resemble small
they resemble shellfish and their diet
includes decaying material.
walnuts with shells. They live in salty pools on the valley
•
The Liver-leaf and Truffles are both
floors.
considered to be plants, so Kosher if
• The Liver-leaf is a bush with large thick edible leaves.
washed to remove insects etc.
Unsurprisingly, they taste like liver.
Orthodox Jews and Buddhists refuse to eat
• Finally, Europan Truffles are brown, fungus-like lumps
all Martian and Europan species since they
that grew under song-bushes, and taste like Earth truffles
are neither animal nor vegetable.
with an added meaty flavour.
These debates are common to many
Naturally there are hundreds of other Europan species, religions; for instance, the Vatican took
several having the ability to survive vacuum for short periods, several years to rule that Venusian fish can
or produce seeds which can survive in vacuum for weeks to be eaten on Fridays!
years, and thousands of subspecies, but the variations are 1
A variant opinion compares bladder-birds to
mostly of interest to biologists.
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

bats, which are Treif, and refuses to eat them.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 55 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Cycle of Fire
Geologists have begun to realise that
Europa’s terrain and atmosphere are truly
transitory, sculpted by titanic tidal,
volcanic, and radioactive forces, and
continually shifting over the millennia:
• Jupiter’s tides left Europa with an
asymmetrical core, a bulge towards
Jupiter containing a concentration of
heavy radioactive elements.
• Heat generated by this radioactive
core material causes volcanism, which
is again concentrated on the
hemisphere facing Jupiter. There are
currently at least eight active
volcanoes in the 30% of Europa’s
surface nearest to Jupiter, none
elsewhere. Rapid mountain-building
causes the underlying rock to melt and
the surface to subside elsewhere in this
basin – the rock of the rest of the
moon is too cool to be so drastically
affected.
• Huge quantities of rock and ash are
thrown out by the volcanoes; in
Europa’s low gravity most of it travels
far beyond the volcanic zone, building
up the surface elsewhere.
• Over millions of years this has resulted
in the whole volcanic basin effectively
sinking towards Europa’s core, while
the surface around it has been built up
by the deposited volcanic ejecta.
Many valleys are three to four miles
deep; the basin’s average depth is
roughly two miles.
• Gas released by the volcanoes tends to
be pulled towards the side of Europa
facing Jupiter, filling the volcanic
basin; these volcanic gases are initially
toxic, but bacteria similar to those
found in sulphurous water on Earth
break them down via thermosynthesis,
releasing carbon dioxide, methane,
and other gases. Photosynthesis then
makes the atmosphere breathable.
• Fossil evidence shows that volcanic gas
production occasionally overloads the
capacity of this ecosystem, leading to
mass extinctions which may have
prevented evolution of intelligent life.

While Europa’s life attracts considerable scientific interest,
most recent expeditions have searched for much more
material rewards; the mountains of the habitable zone have
deposits of protactinium, a highly radioactive mineral that has
only been found in traces elsewhere, which will eventually be
important for the next generation of atomic blast engines. It
seems unlikely that it can be mined on any large scale without
serious damage to the valleys, and currently several law-suits
are working their way through the League’s courts, with
various groups vying for mineral rights and to have Europa
declared a wildlife sanctuary. Until these cases are resolved
there is unlikely to be legal commercial exploitation, but there
is evidence of “hit and run” expeditions in defiance of the
courts, in which ships have landed, identified an ore deposit,
blasted it free without concern for the environment, and left
before they could be intercepted.
No protactinium has been found elsewhere on Europa; it’s
believed that the peculiar geology of the region has exposed
minerals that are otherwise only found miles below the
surface.
In the long run it is likely that mining will be approved, and
a permanent colony set up on the strangest and most
hospitable of Jupiter’s moons. How this will affect life and the
environment of Europa remains to be seen, but the League
and the scientific community in
general will be watching very
carefully. Nobody is entirely sure
how stable Europa’s atmosphere
might be; wholesale damage
might upset the delicate balance
of gas exchange to such an
extent
that
the
moon
experiences one of the mass
extinctions that fossil evidence
suggests occurs every few
thousand years, leaving Europa
uninhabitable.
A bladder-bird (bottom right) glides
over slopes near the floor of an
Europan valley. Higher up the slope,
another has inflated its air bladder in
response to low pressure; after landing
it will crawl up, cross the ridge in
vacuum, and drop down into the next
valley. Jupiter covers 12 º of the sky.
Exploring Europa – Penguin 2096

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 56 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Ganymede: The Tidal Moon
First visited in the 2040s, Ganymede is the biggest, coldest and wettest of
Jupiter’s habitable moons, and the first to be colonised. With the exception
of a region of a few thousand square miles of stable land centred on
Hydropole, the south polar colony, the entire surface is a mixture of swamps,
mud flats and shallow seas, interrupted by occasional rocky outcrops and
mountains, periodically inundated by tidal floods that may exceed fifty feet in
height. Even the mountains are transitory, continually eroded by water and
occasionally shattering under the weight of the water trapped behind them,
and slowly replaced by geological processes.
Ganymede photographed from
Ganymede’s day is a little shorter than its orbital period, so that it rotates Earth’s Moon
Smithsonian Institution 2038
once every six months relative to Jupiter. Although Ganymede is more than
a million kilometres from Jupiter, the planet still covers nearly 8º of the sky, and its gravity raises huge
tides. As with Earth’s tides there are two tidal bulges in the sea,
one facing Jupiter and one on the far side, so that every part of
the moon apart from the poles experiences a high tide every
three months. Tides are higher on the side facing Jupiter and
very slightly higher when Jupiter, Ganymede and the Sun are in
line, but at this distance the Sun’s gravitational effect is minor
compared to the influence of Jupiter. Ganymede’s rotation is
slowing towards a tidal lock, with the friction of the tides
releasing heat (which keeps the seas from freezing) at the
expense of rotational energy; recent observations suggest that
Ganymede will finally synchronize with Jupiter in roughly 950,000 years. Once tidally locked, the seas
will mostly freeze in a permanent ice age, apart from a permanent sea on the side warmed by Jupiter,
surrounded by glaciers. For the moment the temperature averages a
little below freezing at the poles, rising to 40-50ºF at the equator.
Currently life flourishes on Ganymede, with numerous animal
species including the intelligent Nympus. Since most organic
material is swept out to sea almost as soon as it forms, there is no
soil as such over most of the moon. Plant life is thus confined to the
seas and the South Pole (there is no north polar land mass); the
exception is tenacious cree moss, which successfully resists all but the
strongest waves. The Nympus harvest it and bury it in caves
excavated under their villages, using relatively sophisticated
construction techniques to build domes over the entrances which
can usually withstand the pressure of high tide. During the flood the
farmers stay underground for several earth days; since there isn’t
room in the caves for everyone, the remaining villagers stay on the
surface, living in stilt houses made of compressed dead cree. These
houses float if necessary, but some are lost with each tide.
Soon after the first landing it was learned that the blue form of
cree contains a powerful analgesic and curative drug, later named A Ganymedan nympus offers to sell his
Crephine, which is now the main export of Ganymede. A colony catch, an amphibious land-leet (left) and an
aquatic sea-leet (right). Both are edible by
soon built up around the south pole, servicing cree collectors and humans, but the land-leet is generally
explorers, most notably Cree Inc. and its employees. The city of considered "good eating," the sea-leet is not.
Hydrople now has a population of several thousand, most either
Holiday Magazine 2090

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 57 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Cree and Crephine
Red cree moss grows almost everywhere
on Ganymede. It’s widely used by the
nympus, most notably as fertiliser and,
pressed and dried, as a construction
material. It has little value to humans.
Periodically the red moss turns blue,
usually a week or two before the next
high tide. Blue moss contains crephine, a
powerful drug which relieves pain and
promotes healing. A bale of moss can
be processed to produce an ounce or so
of crephine. Unfortunately blue cree
isn’t stable; it contains organisms that
only thrive in the presence of the
ammonia in Ganymede’s air. Ammonia
is water soluble and gradually used up as
the moss ages; if it is buried or
submerged in water for an extended
period, it turns red and its curative
powers are lost. The best time to pick it
is just before the tidal flood, but this is
the most dangerous time to be on the
surface. Cree Inc. traders hire natives to
gather the moss and pack it for
shipment to Earth, but there is only a
limited time window before it turns red,
and one when the natives are at their
busiest, preparing for the inundation. In
2083 Carl Kent, a cree trader, found a
better answer.
The Kent process uses a mixture of
ammonia and natural ingredients such as
gall-ant eggs to turn red cree blue. The
process only works with living moss, not
the huge masses of decaying moss the
nympus have collected over thousands
of years, but still dramatically increases
the quantities of blue moss that are
available for shipment, and expands the
time window for collecting it. Crephine
production trebled in the years after this
discovery.
To date nobody has been able to
duplicate this process off Ganymede;
the living ingredients are too specific to
this moon to be duplicated easily. It’s
rumoured that Ionian Products, an Io
fur trading and drug house, backed the
theft of the formula in 2083; they have
yet to sell any blue cree or crephine.

working in the cree industry or in one of the service industries
connected with it, such as warehousing and the spaceport.
Hydropole has an automated transport system based on wireguided buses, which can navigate through the pole’s occasional
blizzards without problems. Elsewhere the most common means
of transport is the Hipp (Hippocampus Catamiti), an amphibious
animal named for and resembling
Young hipp foraging
the mythical Terran “Sea Horse”.
on the polar shore.
They have bodies about twenty
New Scientist 2100
feet long, two front legs, and a
muscular finned tail instead of
rear legs. On land their broad feet
help them to avoid sinking into
mud; in the water they can swim
very strongly, essential in the
turbulent tidal floods.
Amphibious
trucks
are
becoming more common as the
colony expands, but are less capable of coping with extreme
conditions and rarely venture far north of Hydropole.

Adventure Idea: The Last Round-Up
All of the hipps used around Hydropole come from a single herd.
After several decades of domestication the colonists start to notice
that they are no longer thriving; their endurance and speed is
deteriorating, and they seem to suffer more illnesses. The natives
claim that the herd is too small, and is becoming too inbred; unless
new blood is introduced things will only get worst, and the herd will
be headed for the last round-up. Needless to say the Nympus don’t
use that exact phrase, but that’s what they mean.
Adventurers with suitable skills such as Scientist (zoologist),
Doctor (veterinary surgeon), Riding, etc. should be recruited for a
mission to save the herd – they’re to take the best hipps and ride
North, find wild herds, capture the best animals, and bring them back
to Hydropole. Just to complicate things, National Geographic happens
to have a camera crew on Ganymede, and wants to film the
expedition; Blasters and Ammo wants the adventurers to field-test
some new weapons designed for Ganymede’s conditions; and the
local Ford dealership plans a rival expedition by amphibious truck to
prove that hipps are no longer needed. And needless to say there will
be problems with the tide, dangerous animals, etc. etc.

Hipp

BODY 9, MIND 1, SOUL 1
Scales, Armour -3
Bite, Effect 6, A:F, B:F, C:I
Tail “kick”, Effect 10, A:F, B:I, C:C
Skills: Athlete 10 (swimming), Athlete 4 (running), Brawling 6
Quote: “oooooruuuuunnnngggg!”
Notes: Hipps are essentially amphibious horses. If stressed they may
forget that their riders are less amphibious and need air occasionally…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 58 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Naturally Ganymede has many other animal species, some of
them extremely dangerous:
The giant “amoeba” (gigamoeba proteus) is actually a
multicellular predator which steals the form of its victim, though
they remain semi-transparent and cannot easily be mistaken for
their prey by any intelligent observer. For example, after eating
a land leet one might have tentacles. They are usually small, but
occasional examples are large enough to eat a Nympus, a hipp,
or even a gamma rorqual. They have been known to attack and
even kill humans, but cannot absorb their forms.
Gamma Rorquals are a whale-like species with a spiked tooth
and greatly resemble the narwhal of Earth. They have been
described as mammals in behaviour and body temperature,
although their cellular structure is naturally very different to the
mammals of Earth; one of the best examples of convergent
evolution. They aren’t aggressive, but will defend themselves if
they feel threatened by e.g. an approaching boat. Their pods
are sometimes accompanied by hipps, whose armour makes
them relatively immune to being impaled; there is some
evidence that they band together against predators.
The amphibious Land Leet greatly resembles a Terran
octopus but its physiology actually bears more resemblance to
echinoderms such as starfish. They vary from mouse to rabbit
sized, with larger specimens occasionally reported. They are not
dangerous, and are generally considered to be “good eating”;
all that’s needed to cook them is a knife and a portable ray
stove or other source of heat.
The four-winged Blanket Bat can grow to thirty or more feet
across. It feeds on electrical signals from the nervous system of
its victims, leaving them weakened to the point of helplessness,
but does no physical damage. There are unconfirmed reports of
a similar species on Io. Since their attack is primarily electrical,
it can be defeated by grounding the bat with a metal cable, such
as a harpoon line, but shooting it in the heart (which is on the
centre line of the body) is usually more practical.
From the side a huge, black bulk, that blinding light in its
center, moved toward him.
…he felt himself being drawn. Ahead was the light, bright,
warm, hypnotizing—at either side was nothing.
…he could make out a great, yawning hole, inside which a
piston-like rod moved up and down.
Tidal Moon
Finally, there has been one unconfirmed report of a silicon
species resembling the pyramid-builders of Mars, but mobile
and taking the form of a rectangular black monolith rather than
a pyramid. This species allegedly eats meat as well as minerals,
and is reputedly able to emit a light beam which takes control
of the mind of victims so that they are forced to move into its

The Nympus
The Nympus are often considered the
most intelligent species after humans
and the Thoth. Their underwater domes
are impressive feats of engineering,
incorporating complex hydraulics and
sophisticated construction techniques
and chemistry. They seem to be capable
of learning reasonably good English,
though they are unable to speak it
clearly due to anatomical differences
from humans. Yet they appear to have
little or no ambition, and seem to share
a fatalistic approach that assumes that
everything always ends in disaster, and
that it is pointless to try to evade it. A
typical example is the construction of
rickety floating homes, which must
surely be death traps if they are ever
caught in the full fury of a tidal surge.
Anthropologists have learned that
the Nympus believe in trickster gods
which delight in tormenting the
Nympus, but reserve the most horrible
disasters for those who try to evade
them. For example, workers in the
underwater farms pray that if their
dome collapses they will be allowed to
die quickly; it’s better than praying to
be allowed to escape, because if that
happens something worse is bound to
occur. While the equivalent human gods
are generally believed to respect those
who outsmart them, the Ganymedan
gods resent and punish them.
Physiologically, the Nympus most
resemble Terran amphibious reptiles
such as turtles, but are less well adapted
to aquatic life; they can hold their
breath for several minutes, but lack
most of the mechanisms that are
common amongst animals that spend
extended periods at sea. Their webbed
arms and hands suggest that at one time
they were more aquatic.
The Nympus attitude to humans is
simple; they think that we are
presumptuous fools with too much
pride in our technology, who are likely
to suffer some particularly nasty fate
when the gods get bored with us.
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 59 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Nympus (continued)
Despite these reservations the
Nympus are generally willing to work
with humans and have grasped the idea
of wages, which they use to buy tools,
knives, and crops from the farms around
Hydropole.
Nich’thtell - ATypical Nympus
BODY 2, MIND 3, SOUL 2
Skills: Athlete (swim) 5, Brawling 2,
First Aid (Nympus only) 5, Mechanic
(air purifiers) 4, Linguist (English) 1,
Melee weapon 3, Riding (hipp) 4
Equipment: Knife, fishing spear, tools.
Quote: “Yeh, shuth phulph!” (“yes, shut
valve”)
Notes: Nich’thtell is a cree gatherer and
farm mechanic. Between tides he
gathers red cree for use as fertiliser and
blue to sell to Cree Inc. traders. As the
tide comes closer he moves into his
villages’ underground farm and tends to
its life support machinery.
The village shaman has prophesised
that a blanket bat will drain his life
force, after which he will drown. This is
generally regarded as a good death, fast
and relatively painless, and he is envied
by those who have been told that they
will be skewered by gamma rorquals,
trampled by hipps, sacrificed to eldritch
demons by the human colonists, etc.
Role Playing: Nich’thtell is very much a
fatalist, convinced that his lot in life is
to die, and eager to get it over with if it
will save him from the torments of the
gods. This doesn’t mean he deliberately
goes out looking for death; any attempt
to cheat the gods that way inevitably
leads to a much more horrible death!
Until his happy release he will be a
dutiful widowed father to two young
Nympus (three others have died
horribly in childhood) and a hard
worker who helps to keep his village
fed. A useful role model is Marvin the
Paranoid Android.
Nympus player characters should be built
on 15 points, and begin with no
knowledge of human languages or skills.

maw, which is basically a powerful rock crusher. Victims are
aware of their condition but have no free will, unless something
interrupts their line of sight to this peculiar creature.

Amoeba
Gamma Rorqual
Land Leet
Blanket Bat
Black Monolith

BODY
3D6
10
1-3
15
20

Weapon
See notes1
“Spear”2
None
See notes3
See notes4

1

Effect
BODY
12
10
15

A
F
F/I
F
I

B
I
I
I
C

C
C/K
C/K
C
K

The Amoeba’s attack (made with BODY+1 Brawling) varies
according to whatever it last ate; it might use tentacles for
strangling or wrestling damage, fangs, a spear, etc. They are not
known to be venomous, but Ganymede does have venomous
species, and it is possible that this attribute could be added to
another attack; if so, its Effect will be BODY /2. OPTIONALLY
their attack injects chemicals which start to convert native species
to another amoeba whilst still alive; if so, Terrans will just be
poisoned, not transformed, but Nympus will be at risk.
2
Attacks with Brawling 6
3
Attacks with Brawling 8, attacks target BODY first, then MIND or
SOUL (whichever is lowest)
• On an F result the characteristic is reduced by 1
• On an I result it is reduced by 1D6
• On a C result it immediately drops to zero.
If any characteristic is reduced to zero the victim will become
unconscious; if there is only one target the bat continues to feed
until all characteristics are reduced to zero, otherwise it attacks
someone else. After an attack it takes 1D3 hours for
characteristics to rise from zero to 1, after that recovery rolls
against Difficulty 3 can be made for each characteristic once an
hour:
• On an A result there is no improvement.
• A B result restores 1D3 to the characteristic.
• A C result restores 1D6 to the characteristic.
4
This creature has Armour -4. It can move about 20ft per round,
but once moving does not easily change direction. Its initial attack
targets the MIND of anyone looking at the monolith’s light with
Effect 8; on a B or C result the victim cannot do anything except
move towards the monolith by whatever means they were
previously using, or walking at a normal speed if they were
previously stationary. If a roll of MIND against the attack’s Effect
gets a C result the victim can look away in subsequent rounds, but
not in the first round. Otherwise, the hypnotic effect will only be
interrupted if something obstructs the monolith’s light. Victims
who cannot break free continue to move forward until they enter
the monolith’s maw. Once inside the maw they are attacked by
the equivalent of a large rock crusher, taking damage each round,
but will be free of the compulsion. Since they are also probably
badly injured this isn’t necessarily much help!

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 60 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Callisto: Cold to the Core
There’s very little to be said about Callisto; it’s nearly twice as far from
Jupiter as Ganymede, and due to a variety of factors including distance,
weaker gravity, weaker tidal forces, and little or no internal heat is roughly
a hundred degrees colder. It’s essentially a rocky globe with an average
surface temperature around -70ºF (-57ºC); its core is solid, with no
molten centre. There is no atmosphere except for traces of various inert
gases, no known life, and nothing especially interesting has ever been
found there; certainly nothing to justify the cost of another expedition.
Callisto has been relatively unchanged for several hundred million
years, without any of the geological upheavals of Jupiter’s other moons. In this tracking experiment a Patrol
Asteroid and meteor collisions have left the surface covered with hundreds vessel running its atomic blast at
full power while orbiting Callisto is
of thousands of craters of various sizes, but there are no great “seas” or visible in photographs taken from a
other distinctive features. One consequence is that the accessible minerals ground-based telescope on Io. The
are too poor for it to be worth setting up mining operations; without ship is in the top left corner of the
picture, and appears to be an
volcanism heavy elements such as gold or uranium stay close to the core.
unusually bright star.
In 2093 Patrol ships searching for the pirate Red Peri detected
The exhaust was not readily
wreckage in one of the moon’s larger craters. This was initially thought to detectable at the reduced power
be the Peri, which had not been seen in several months, but was soon levels typical of cruising speeds.
identified as the gutted hulk of the Planetary Lines freighter Sirius, whose League of Nations Patrol:
crew mutinied en route from Earth to Mars in 2091. The ship was missing Confidential Report on Piracy, 2082
its engines, air purifiers, fuel, etc. Four bodies were identified as the ringleaders of the mutiny – the
Captain and passengers had earlier been marooned on Phobos but fortunately rescued by the Patrol. Five
other mutineers were never found. Forensic evidence suggests that the Sirius was intercepted by pirates
several weeks after the mutiny, and that the pirates executed mutineers who refused to cooperate.
Forensic evidence suggests that the pirate ship was not the Red Peri; surface dust near the wreck was fused
by the exhaust of another ship with a uranium engine, the Peri is believed to have radium or protactinium
blasts.
Prior to this, Callisto had been suggested as a possible hiding place for pirates, but it seems implausible
that they would dump the wreckage close to home. Additionally, there are none of the minerals and
other resources that would be needed to sustain a pirate base, and Callisto is usually visible from the inner
moons and from ships travelling between them – it seems unlikely that a pirate ship could come and go
without being noticed sooner or later, especially when running its engines at full power to take off or
land. An argument in favour of the idea of Callisto as a pirate base is its relative closeness to the
populated moons of Jupiter, and some of the richest cargoes in the solar system, and one line of thought
suggests that dumping the Sirius there might be a double bluff, with a well-concealed base elsewhere on
the moon. There is little evidence either way.
Statistical analysis of recent attacks shows that ships on routes from Venus and Mars to Earth are most
at risk, with the majority of ships attacked being Planetary Lines vessels, and no special emphasis on ships
on the Jupiter routes, but this may simply reflect higher traffic levels on the inner system routes.

Adventure Idea: Spares
Components from the Sirius are found aboard the Taltos, a ship mothballed on Earth’s moon. They aren’t original
equipment; they must have been fitted as replacements before the ship was scrapped in 2105. Taltos also belonged
to Planetary Lines, and would have been serviced in their own yards, but the service logs (which would have
recorded serial numbers of any components removed or replaced) were discarded when the ship was
decommissioned. It’s possible that for some reason parts from the Sirius were legitimately removed and fitted to the
Taltos prior to the mutiny, but the insurers suspect some sort of scam, and hire the adventurers to investigate.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 61 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

A rare view of Saturn from below the plane of its rings. Most of the brighter “stars” in the picture are Saturn’s smaller moons;
Titan and the other major moons are in much more distant orbits.
National Geographic 2098

Saturn: The Ringed Wonder
Saturn is the largest planet after Jupiter, and like Jupiter radiates enough internal heat to warm its moons
a little. It has an incredibly diverse system of rings and more than sixty moons and moonlets, but only
two, Titan and Iapetus, have atmospheres. The others have been mapped from space but for the most
part have not been visited; their extremely low mass and gravity suggests that there are no heavy metals,
the main reason for visiting airless moons.
The rings of Saturn are about 300,000 kilometres wide, beginning roughly 6,630 kilometres above
the atmosphere, but average only about twenty metres thick. They’re made mostly of ice and meteoric
dust, and in general aren’t dangerous, but they do include tens of thousands of “bergs,” lumps of ice as
large as a gyro or an old-style automobile, and a few hundred ranging in size from a small house to the
iceberg that sunk the Titanic. All are large enough to destroy any spacecraft that runs into them. Several
of Saturn’s smallest moonlets orbit in the belt, or inside it, and are simply larger versions of the “bergs.”
Only the major moons listed below are considered to have any permanency.
Some of the statistics below may be a little misleading; for example, while Saturn’s gravity is 0.95g at
the “surface” this is simply the top of its cloud layer, and gravity is considerably higher (and the pressure
and temperature would destroy any imaginable craft) nearer the solid core. Escape velocity is three times
that of Earth, around 35.5 km/sec. With the exception of Titan, all of Saturn’s major moons are tidally
locked to the planet, and keep the same face turned towards Saturn all the time.

Saturn

Diameter
km
60,268

Orbital radius
(AU)
9.55 – 10.12

Orbital
Period (years)
29.46

Gravity
Earth=1
.95g

Major
Moons
Mimas
Enceladus
Tethys
Dione
Rhea
Titan
Iapetus

Diameter
km
400
500
1060
1120
1530
5150
1430

Orbital radius
(km)
185,000
238,000
295,000
377,000
527,000
1,222,000
3,560,000

Orbital
Period (days)
0.9
1.4
1.9
2.7
4.5
16.0
79.0

Gravity
Earth=1
0.006
0.001
0.001
0.006
0.003
0.557
0.023

Day
10.6 hours
Day
0.9 days
1.4 days
1.9 days
2.7 days
4.5 days
18 hours
79.0 days

Atmosphere
Hydrogen, helium, trace gases
Atmosphere
None
None
None
None
None
Oxygen / Xenon
Oxygen / Neon

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 62 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

…his description of the Titan climate had sounded rather like a word picture of an Eskimo hell. He hadn’t
exaggerated, either…
… Outside was the unbelievable Titanian night with its usual hundred-mile gale screaming against the
curved walls, and the glitter of ice mountains showing green under the glare of Saturn with its rings visible
edgewise from the satellite since it revolved in the same plane…
…surely no one could survive a cross-country journey here through nights that were generally eighty
below zero, or even days that sometimes attained the balmy warmth of just above freezing…
… Tim shivered as the grinding roar of a shifting mountain sounded above the scream of the wind. That
was common enough here; they were always shifting under the enormous tidal pull of the giant Saturn and
the thrust of that incredible wind.
Flight On Titan

Titan: Eskimo Hell
Titan is in many ways an anomaly – a world in miniature
with gravity that belies its relatively small size, a dense
atmosphere, and a climate which, though horrible by normal
standards, is considerably warmer than it should be for a
moon so far from the sun and its primary1. The explanation
isn’t complicated; Titan’s core is massive, dense, and highly
radioactive, producing about half of the heat needed, the
remainder is supplied mainly by heat radiated from Saturn,
supplemented by the Sun and heating from by tidal effects.
Titan’s axis is inclined 29º relative to the plane of its
Approaching Titan the rings of Saturn are almost
orbit, so that most areas experience small seasonal changes invisible, most noticeable as a black shadow across the
in temperature during its 16-day “year.” There are also tidal planet’s equator. Some other moons, closer to Saturn,
effects from Saturn’s gravity. Together, they cause cessation are visible in the plane of the rings. Titan’s dense
of the 100 MPH prevailing winds during the “equinoxes,” atmosphere conceals surface features.
National Geographic 2098
lasting an hour or so, followed
by a switch in their direction, from Easterly to Westerly or vice versa. This
occurs every eight Earth days, roughly every ten and two thirds Titan days.
Titan’s atmosphere is usually too cold to absorb enough water vapour to
allow snow to form, and most of the moon’s water is on the surface as ice,
much of it in the form of unstable ice “mountains” which superficially
resemble glaciers (but without a supporting mountain underneath), but are
actually dunes composed of billions of ice crystals, and shaped by the wind;
on Earth the crystals would be compacted under enough pressure to force
them to melt and merge into homogenous blocks of ice, but on Titan the
Sample from one of Titan’s ice low gravity, low temperature, and lack of humidity tend to prevent this from
“mountains” (left) compared with happening, and the crystals can easily be separated. As a result these ice
ice from Earth’s Arctic. Although dunes slowly shift as crystals are blown from the windward side and settle in
they were taken from similar
the lee, and can occasionally move much faster if for any reason their
depths, the sample from Titan
consists largely of unfused crystals. foundations are undermined. This is most common after periods of warm
Scientific American 2103 weather, since melt water sinks into the ice and causes crystals to fuse, which
1

Weinbaum’s version of Titan’s climate, day/night cycle, eclipses, and seasons, as described in Flight on Titan, has
several internal inconsistencies. Some parts of the description have been modified or ignored for game purposes.
This story’s version of history and some details of the rest of the solar system are also at odds with the other stories
of this sequence. See the sidebar on page 12 and the adventure outline Time Slip on Titan on page 66 for more.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 63 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Superficially resembling a seal, this native of
Titan has evolved to live in 100 MPH winds.
Its eyes are adapted for dim light, but are
usually covered by nictitating membranes to
protect them from damage in ice storms.
Time-Life, 2092

Ghurrr – a Titan native

BODY 8, MIND 2, SOUL 2
Bite Effect 9, A:F, B:I, C:I/C
Blubber, armour -2
Skills: Brawling 4
Equipment: Jack knife, small mirror
(both Terran), three smooth shiny
stones, one flame orchid.
Quote: "Ugha! Huss!"
Notes: This is the human view of a
typical native, and may be entirely
accurate; a species only slightly brighter
than dogs. Alternatively, they may have
hidden talents; it’s possible that they
have a rich life of the mind, a complex
verbal culture of philosophy and poetry
which is inaccessible to humans. They
seem to have no technology, but
perhaps they have cities somewhere on
or under the ice, or an intuitive
understanding of science. If so, modify
MIND and other characteristics to
reflect this, and add suitable skills.
Role Playing: The natives are friendly,
and shouldn’t give humans any surprises
unless provoked. If they are provoked –
for example, if humans take to hunting
them for their pelts or for sport – they
may start to fight back, by e.g. teaming
up to ambush hunters, or burying
themselves under the ice for surprise
attacks. Even as described they are
powerful and dangerous enough to be a
real problem.

may change the underlying structure. Titan does have real
mountains, of course, such as the Mountains of the Damned
where Nivia (the only city) is located, but the lower slopes are
covered in loosely packed ice to depths of hundreds of feet.
Twice every Saturn year, roughly once every fifteen Earth
years, Titan is eclipsed by Saturn in several successive orbits.
These eclipses last up to six hours, and can have a significant
effect on Titan’s weather; the actual temperature change is
small, but occurs at the same time as the strongest combined
tides from Saturn and the Sun’s gravity, and eclipses are often
thus associated with unusually severe storms which have been
known to last several days, and cause major ice movements.
Titan’s main exports are gold, uranium, and flame-orchids,
pearl-like thermoluminescent stones which convert body heat
into dazzling and ever-shifting coloured light. The first flameorchid brought to Earth sold for $500,000, but later stones
sold for less, as they were no longer unique. Nevertheless a
good stone about the size of a pigeon’s egg will still sell for
around $50,000, and their value, combined with their tiny size
and weight, makes them a near-perfect spaceship cargo. By
contrast, gold is barely worth shipping from Titan to Earth
when the costs and insurance fees are taken into account.
Cultured Flame-Orchids

Recently the colonists learned that they could culture flame-orchids
by placing fragments of a broken stone onto gravel found in caves on
the Mountains of the Damned. It isn’t yet clear how this process
works, if it can be made to work with gravel from other areas, or if it
will work on Earth. But regardless of the practicalities, if the news
comes out the value of flame-orchids will plummet. The colonists are
agreed that this will be a bad thing, and have decided to conceal the
news as long as they can, sell as many stones as possible without
bringing the market value down, then eventually cash out before the
bubble bursts. The minority that actually like living on Titan are
looking for alternative exports, such as biochemicals, furs, etc. It’s an
unstable situation, and there will be a lot of very angry colonists if the
news gets out too soon, or outsiders discover the secret…

Despite its horrific climate Titan has several known lifeforms. The chemistry of life is based on arsenic compounds,
not iron, and humans can only eat native organisms after
complex chemical processing.
The intelligent natives superficially resemble seals, but their
internal anatomy is unlike that of any terrestrial vertebrate, and
more closely resembles molluscs such as slugs. They are
generally considered to be slightly more intelligent than dogs,
but this may be an underestimate; they cope very well with
their environment, and appear to be able to communicate with
one another – when humans began to trade for flame-orchids

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 64 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

most natives seemed to know what they wanted after a few days A Note on Iapetus
– but humans have never learned their language, and they appear Titan is generally considered Saturn’s
not to understand human speech. Despite this they are friendly to only habitable moon, but Iapetus also
1
humans, apparently seeing some advantage in trading. They has life – which survives at -100
prefer manufactured goods, especially jack-knives and can open degrees with air pressure about a fifth of
and close the blades with their three-clawed hands, but have that at the top of Mount Everest. The
main forms are small to microscopic
never been seen using them; it’s possible that owning them is
worms, bacteria, algae and fungi, all
considered a sign of status, giving some advantage in mating
toxic to humans since their biochemistry
rituals. Goods are carried in pouches located under folds of skin is based on arsenic, like that of Titan.
on the back.
There are no known biological or
Some other species include:
mineral resources worth exploiting, no
Whiplash trees are a carnivorous plant species resembling intelligent life, there is no colony, and
dwarf willows which tries to ensnare and strangle animals for use the gravity is so low that most visitors
as fertiliser. Their whips generally can’t hurt a human wearing suffer from vertigo. It’s a small
cold weather gear, but they have been known to entangle unpleasant ice-ball, like Ceres but solid
people’s legs, and it’s possible that someone could be caught or to the core, and usually ignored.
1
The Lotus Eaters
injured by a fall.
Knife-Kites superficially resemble birds with razor-sharp beaks
which fly before the oncoming wind and attempt to impale any other animals they encounter. Their wings
are more like those of bats, with a leathery membrane stretched over supporting ribs. Their birdlike
appearance owes nothing to Terran biology; it’s simply a coincidence of form
following function.
Ice-Ants are a communal species of three-legged animals, averaging about three
inches in diameter, which build colonies under the ice. Their tunnel complexes are
topped by artificial ice domes resembling thin-walled igloos. Air warmed by their
metabolic processes enters the dome, and the warmth is used to cultivate moulds
and melt ice for drinking water. Their domes are actually constructed from the
inside out, initially as bubbles forming in the ice, with the ice-ants extending them
sideways and upwards to maximize water recovery and the area available for growing fungus. Explorers
have used the domes as shelters occasionally; they are much warmer than Titan’s surface, especially at
night, and the ice-ants generally ignore intruders, apart from sometimes digging channels underneath
them if they are blocking the drainage of the dome. They have been known to scavenge organic wastes
such as food scraps, pieces of leather, etc., carried by human intruders, and it’s assumed that they use
them to fertilize the mould they live on.
Ice-ants cooperate to build their domes and harvest mould, and use simple tools such as sledges made
from the leaves of whiplash trees. The name given to this species is more descriptive of their life style than
their true nature; they are not insects (or particularly close in anatomy to any other Terran animal, except
possibly sea urchins or starfish); the combination of radial symmetry and jointed legs is unique to Titan.
Titanian threadworms are telepathic, with hypnotic powers, and may be intelligent. If so it is an
inimical intelligence which seems to be focussed solely on obtaining food. In view of the dangers of
approaching these creatures very little is known of them; however, the rough description is of a wormlike
creature with at least one eye stalk, which may possibly exhibit radial symmetry, so it seems possible that
the species may be related to ice-ants.
Some carved pillars were found in the first threadworm burrow explored, which suggests that at some
point Titan supported a more advanced civilisation. It isn’t clear if they were the work of the seal-like
species, of the threadworms, or of another intelligent species; since this discovery is linked to the
discovery that flame-orchids can be cultured, the news may take some time to reach Earth.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 65 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Ice Ant - Smithsonian Institutin 2111

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

BODY Weapon
Effect
A
B
C
Whiplash Tree
2D6 See notes1
BODY/2
B
B/F
F
Knife Kite
3-6
“Spear”2
8
F
I
C/K
Ice Ant
1
None
Threadworm
8
See notes3
10
F
I
C
1
Whiplash trees attack to pummel and entangle small prey. They
aren’t really evolved for an upright large target such as humans.
They attack (Brawling 4) with 1-3 whips per round; if they hit they
will try to wrap around the target and secure it (as a “wrestling”
attack), then continue to hold it until the target is dead. This is
unlikely to work against humans.
2
Knife kites rely on the power of the wind for their attacks, and will
only be encountered when it is blowing. They only get one chance
to attack (Brawling BODY+2) – if they miss the target they must fly
on and are unlikely to be seen again.
3
Threadworms use a hypnotic attack similar to the Dream Beasts of
Mars, in this case to induce sleep, then if successful bite their prey
and drink its blood. The initial attack is made with MIND 6 against
the victim’s MIND; if there is more than one target the attack is
made with MIND reduced by 1 per additional victim.
• On an A result the victim feels very slightly drowsy and is
aware that the creature is attempting hypnosis
• On a B result the victim feels very drowsy, attempts to
become more comfortable, and is unaware that the creature
is attempting hypnosis.
• On a C result the victim falls asleep.
Once the victim is asleep the threadworm attacks with its mouth,
Effect 6, and starts to drain blood, inflicting injuries as above.

Adventure Idea: Time-Slip on Titan

The version of history described in Flight on Titan doesn’t quite match
that of Weinbaum’s other Planetary stories. For game purposes these
differences have been ignored, but what if there are two parallel
universes, somehow overlapping and merging in a weak point of the
space-time continuum on Titan?
• In one universe the year is 2115; Venus only has a narrow
habitable zone, mostly consisting of deadly swamps, and Mars is
inhabited by the Thoth, mound builders, etc. The Planetary
Trading Corporation failed in 2110, leading to a stock market
crash, but the market is slowly recovering.
• In the other universe the year is 2146; Venus is much more widely
habitable and has seas, but the last Martians died thousands of
years ago. Because Mars had little to offer, expansion into the
outer Solar System was slow, and spacecraft are still more primitive
than they are in the other universe. The PTC failed in 2142, taking
the stock market with it, and there is little sign of recovery.
Somehow the adventurers find a portal between the universes; there
must be ways to take advantage. For example, the 2115 world has
better spaceships, 2146 has a more colonisable version of Venus. A
few patents could make you very rich. Of course there are bound to be
snags… Make them nasty and hard to spot!

Adventure Idea: Rough Justice
Ten months after the first flame-orchid
gems are found (and some time before
it is learned that they can be cultured):
Interest in these gems is soaring, and a
new breed of colonists has started to
arrive, men prepared to venture into the
wilderness in search of a quick profit.
Most have no long-term commitment to
Titan, their goal is simply to get in,
make a killing, and get out again.
Unfortunately someone has taken
this all too literally. The colony’s
military chaplain, Captain John Bennett,
has been found dead, stabbed with a
knife of the type used as trade goods,
just as prospectors are converging on
Nivea for the next flight back to Earth.
The assumption is that one of the
prospectors stabbed him, the question is
why. The adventurers are given the job
of finding some answers; exactly why is
left to the referee.
They should soon learn that
Bennett’s brother Paul was another
trader, but he had vanished when the
colony’s shuttle flew to pick him up. His
cabin was found abandoned, and there is
virtually no chance that he has survived.
Everyone assumes that he was lost as the
result of an accident or animal attack.
In fact both brothers were murdered
by another trader. Arthur Wolfe, who
was camped a few miles from Paul, had
no luck finding flame-orchid gems, and
eventually killed Paul to steal his stones.
He also took Paul’s rifle. Chaplain
Bennett recognized it and unwisely
confronted him, and was stabbed to
keep him quiet.
Solving this is relatively easy once
Wolfe is a suspect; he was the only
trader camped near Paul, and the rifle is
engraved with Paul’s initials. But a lot of
people liked Chaplain Bennett, and will
want to see Wolfe punished, possibly
without the formality of a trial. The
adventurers need to defuse the situation
and ensure that proper justice is done.
See the final adventure, Earth Girls aren’t
Easy, for more on Titan and Nivea.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 66 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky
Comparison of Uranus and the Earth
Smithsonian Institution 2102

So inconceivably remote is Uranus that the distance to its ravelled,
Saturn, is actually greater than the total distance from Saturn to
Jupiter, from Jupiter to the asteroids, from these to Mars, and from
Mars to the Earth. It is a wild, alien, mystery-cloaked planet with only
icy Neptune and Pluto between it and the interstellar void…
…He had explored, out of all the millions of square miles of surface,
just one square kilometer forty-five thousand miles away from where
they stood. All the rest was mystery…
The Planet of Doubt

Uranus: The Shrouded World
Perhaps the oddest of all the outer worlds, Uranus superficially resembles the other giant planets, but is
actually a rocky world with a breathable atmosphere, oceans, and life, but almost sixteen times the surface
area of Earth. Volcanic processes keep the surface warm and maintain a steady temperate climate
regardless of day and night; this is fortunate because the axis is inclined to 97.7º from the ecliptic, so that
each of the poles in turn is in darkness for nearly forty Earth years. Dense clouds help to maintain the
climate, acting like a greenhouse to reflect heat back to the surface, but this allows very little heat to
escape to warm any of the planet’s moons.
Because of Uranus’s distance from the sun and from Titan, the main staging post for expeditions to the
outer Solar System, there have only been two brief visits, in 2060 and 2100; the next conjunction will
occur in 2140, by which time improved engines should allow an extended stay. The first expedition
explored a small area of the planet near its south pole, the second went north. There has as yet been no
opportunity to explore the equatorial zones or the seas.
A major difficulty facing all explorers is the opacity of the atmosphere. Essentially, the planet is
permanently enshrouded in green-grey fog, which absorbs sound and radio transmissions, and limits
visibility to approximately fifty feet. The colour does not indicate any dangerous chemical composition;
it’s made of water vapour, like fog on Earth, but the atmosphere as a whole is so thick that only a
restricted portion of the spectrum can penetrate to the surface. Because the ground is always warmer than
the air, at around 10ºC, there is a continuous cycle of warm moist air rising from damp ground,
condensing in the cool upper atmosphere as cloud, and slowly settling again as dense mist, then
evaporating again. Since the climate is more or less independent of the Sun and other outside influences,
there is no reason to believe that storms ever occur, except as an accompaniment to volcanoes and other
geological phenomena. It should be stressed that things may be very different at the equator, or at the
poles at when they are tilted away from the sun. In particular, there may be tropical storms resembling
the hurricanes of Earth, but centred on heat sources such as volcanoes.
Because of the poor visibility and communications both expeditions were very limited in their range –
to avoid getting lost the explorers had to stay tethered to their ships. The map of Uranus thus consists of
a few circles, with a maximum diameter around 2000ft, the rest is terra incognita. Anything could be out
there, but it may be centuries before there is anything like a complete map of the surface.
Anticipating the next conjunction, there has been some discussion of methods for extending visibility –
the most promising involves using an atomic blast to heat the atmosphere and create a continuouslyreplenished “bubble” of warm dry air. Although it would naturally tend to rise, if the temperature was
carefully controlled it might raise visibility to several hundred square feet. If there is ever permanent

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 67 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

colonization domed cities seem the most likely solution; since the air inside such a dome would be at
more or less the same pressure as the outside atmosphere, just less saturated with moisture, there would
be no need for great structural strength. A bubble of cellulose would probably suffice.
Despite its huge size Uranus has a limited range of plants and animals – but again it should be stressed
that explorers have only visited regions close to the poles, things may be very different at the equator.
The second expedition recorded a dozen or so species of cryptogamoid plants (plants which reproduce
via spores) which resemble the aquatic pond-weeds and sea-weeds of Earth, ferns, etc., but found nothing
analogous to trees. Since the light is diffuse plants generally spread outwards, rather than upwards, and
the forty-year night presumably kills off most plants, making long-term growth impossible.
Only one species of animal has been observed in any
detail, but since the “caterpillar beast” is a carnivore it must
be assumed that there are smaller animals for it to feed on.
These creatures resemble the processionary caterpillars of
Earth, moving in long lines with their nervous systems linked
by a disc-shaped organ whose structure is not clearly
understood, but also appears to be used to sense sound and A “caterpillar-beast” of Uranus forages at the
edge of a rock pool. The disc-like sensory organ
possibly to smell. Each “segment” is eight foot long and of the lead organism is extended to smell the
about four wide, with six legs, but otherwise almost ground. The colours and shadows are the result of
completely featureless. The front creature in each line directs the use of a powerful flash gun, anti-haze filters,
the rest of the line, so that they appear to move as one long and special processing; the scene would look grey
animal; if the line is cut, for example by shooting one of the and hazy to the unaided human eye.
Photograph by Dr. Patricia Hammond, 2100
animals, each separate part carries on; the first animal behind
the break takes over as leader for the rear part. These Caterpillar-beast
creatures are blind, but very sensitive to vibrations and noise. (Each segment) BODY 8, MIND -, SOUL They are believed to be the larval stage of a flying animal, Bite, Effect 9, A:F, B:I, C:I/C
Trample, Effect 8 (x6) A:B, B:F, C:I
but because of the limited visibility the adult creatures have
Skills: Brawling 4
only been seen as shadows.

There is little more to be said about Uranus; pending
another expedition all that remains is guesswork.
Moons

Notes: These creatures attack in complete
silence, apart from the pounding of their
feet. Once they have identified a target each
segment bites at it and attempts to trample
it. Chains initially consist of 10-30 animals;
at least half must be killed or wounded
before the beast will retreat.

Uranus has numerous moons, all of them orbiting in the
plane of the planet’s equator and sharing its axial tilt. Due to
the limited time available for the expeditions the moons have
not been explored, although several have been photographed from space. None has a detectable
atmosphere, and it is thought that they are bitterly cold and (like Uranus itself) poor in heavy elements.
Details of the five largest are in the table below; all are tidally locked to Uranus:
Diameter
km

Orbital radius
(AU)

Orbital
Period
(years)

Gravity
Earth=1

Day

Uranus

51,120

18.3 – 21.1

84.3

0.91

17h 14m

Major
Moons
Miranda
Ariel
Umbriel
Titania
Oberon

Diameter
km
471
1158
1169
1578
1522

Orbital radius
(km)
129,390
191,020
266,300
435,910
583,520

Orbital
Period (days)
1.4
2.5
4.1
8.7
13.5

Gravity
Earth=1
0.008
0.027
0.023
0.038
0.035

Day
Earth=1
1.4
2.5
4.1
8.7
13.5

Atmosphere
Argon / Oxygen
Atmosphere
None
None
None
None
None

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 68 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Neptune: The Last Enigma
As of 2115 only one world remains unexplored. An expedition scheduled
for Saturn’s conjunction with Neptune in 2096 lost radio contact soon
after leaving Titan and is assumed to have been lost en route; the next
conjunction is in 2132. Spectroscopy shows helium, oxygen and water
vapour in Neptune’s atmosphere, suggesting that it may be a world
somewhat like Uranus. The presence of oxygen implies plant life, and
measurements of infra-red radiation suggest a good deal of internal heat,
more than Uranus, although it should be remembered that Uranus’s dense
atmosphere blocks heat very effectively, helping to keep the planet warm –
Comparison of Neptune and Earth
if Neptune’s atmosphere isn’t an effective “greenhouse” surface
Smithsonian Institution 2096
temperatures may be lower.
Astronomers have noticed cloud vortexes near the equator which are probably large tropical storms,
with winds more powerful than are ever seen on Earth or Titan. It’s hoped that these are confined to the
upper atmosphere, with conditions more reasonable nearer the surface, but nobody really knows.
Neptune has several moons, but very little is known about most of them. Only one, Triton, is large
enough to have any hope of retaining an atmosphere; it is also the only one of Neptune’s moons that is
visible via Earth-based telescopes, being about the same size as Earth’s moon. Triton’s orbit is retrograde;
it rotates in the opposite direction to Neptune’s rotation, implying that it is a captured body rather than
one that formed with Neptune. It’s by far the largest retrograde moon known to science. Observations
suggest that its density is low, and that it may be made largely of ice and lighter forms of rock, with little
or no internal heating. If so it is probably extremely cold and airless. All of the other moons are so small
that they were only discovered after the Io observatory was built; the largest is about 400km in diameter.
Names are still being discussed by the International Astronomical Union.
Diameter
km
Neptune
Major
Moon
Triton

Orbital radius
(AU)

Orbital
Period
(years)

Gravity
Earth=1

Day

Atmosphere

49,428

30.06

165

1.1g

14 hours

Helium / Oxygen

Diameter
km
2,707

Orbital radius
(km)
354,759

Orbital
Period (days)
-5.9

Gravity
Earth=1
0.08g

Day
Earth=1
??

Atmosphere
??

Neptune and Pluto
Neptune was first discovered when astronomers noticed anomalies in the orbit of Uranus, and realised
that another massive planet must be present. Pluto was discovered after it was realised that there were
similar anomalies in the orbit of Neptune. This isn’t coincidental; Pluto’s orbit crosses the orbit of
Neptune, and the planets have 3:2 mean motion resonance; for every three of Neptune’s orbits around
the Sun, Pluto makes two. For various reasons this is a stable relationship, and although the effects of their
mutual gravitational attraction are noticeable with sensitive instruments, they cancel out in successive
orbits. There is no danger of these worlds colliding! Pluto’s orbit is highly inclined, and even at their
closest, when Pluto’s orbit briefly crosses that of Neptune, they are about 8 AU apart. Initially it was
thought that Pluto might be a moon of Neptune, somehow displaced from orbit, but Pluto is too big and
the relationship between their orbits is too stable for that to be possible.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 69 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

“Come on,” he said, turning to a space suit swaying on its hook. “No use wasting time. We’ll take a look
around.” He clambered into the heavy garment, noting irritably its greater weight on the surface of the black
planet. The Plutonian gravitation added thirty-six pounds to his Terrestrial hundred and eighty…
… he was the fourth man and Nestor the fifth to set foot on the black planet. Atsuki, of course, was the first, if
one credits his figures and photographs, the intrepid Hervey the second, and Caspari the third. Here on this
lonely outpost of the solar system, high noon was hardly brighter than full moonlight on Earth, and the queer,
black surface that gives Pluto its low albedo made it seem still darker…
…”Would you like to stroll outside?” she gibed. “It’s not cold—just ten above zero. Above absolute zero, I
mean. Cold enough to liquefy and freeze all gases but hydrogen and helium. How long do you think it would
take to freeze that hot blood and hotter head of yours?”
The Red Peri

Pluto: Lair of the Pirate Queen
First visited in 2053, Pluto is slightly larger than the Earth and has higher
gravity, but its remote position means that it can only be reached during
conjunctions with Saturn; at other times the distance is beyond the
capability of current engines. Despite this, it’s actually easier to travel to
Pluto than to Uranus or Neptune; due to their sheer mass and size both of
the latter planets have high escape velocities, about twice that of Earth or
Pluto, which adds hugely to the amount of fuel needed to decelerate and
land on a world or its moons, and the amount of fuel needed to leave again
afterwards. This has a knock-on effect on the weight of supplies that can be Pluto – the approximate location of
carried and the time that can be spent exploring, and means that there is a the Red Peri’s lair, now believed to
be abandoned, is ringed.
wider “window” for travel to Pluto either side of conjunctions.
Although metals of all sorts are abundant on Pluto, travel is still Boyd’s Marine Annual Report, 2090
prohibitively difficult and too expensive for most commercial purposes. For example, shipping gold from
mines on Pluto would cost considerably more than the gold was worth, and even radium would barely
pay its way.
The overwhelming impression left by the planet is cold dark desolation. The surface is jagged rock with
“snow drifts” of frozen air. The Sun is a pinpoint in the sky which seems to illuminate the surface about as
well as a full Moon illuminates the Earth, but this is actually an illusion1 caused by the tiny size of the Sun
in the sky and other factors. The terrain is chaotic, covered in ridges and valleys which were formed by
the surface of the planet buckling as it cooled. There appear to be no internal heat sources, and the core
is believed to be solid and cold.
In view of these facts it seems incredible that Pluto should harbour life, but Keene’s report makes it
clear that there are several species of so-called crawlers on Pluto. These extraordinary creatures are
crystalline life-forms, aggregates of crystals held together and moved by powerful electrostatic charges,
which seem to live solely to add more material to their structure, reproducing by splitting off smaller
crystals. Keene describes three species, all apparently specialised to absorb a single element, and allegedly
confined to a single complex of caves, and states that he heard of several others.
1

Pluto’s daylight actually ranges from two hundred to six hundred times brighter than moonlight on Earth,
comparable to a badly overcast day on Earth or the lighting in an average home. It generally appears to be much
darker because the Sun is perceived as a bright star, there is no atmospheric scattering of light, shadows are
completely dark, and most of the surface materials absorb light with minimal reflections.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 70 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

The Pirates

The rustling crystals moved in glittering chunks from thumbnail size
to aggregations as large as dogs. They crackled and rustled along,
apparently moving by a slow shifting of the lower crystals, much as
a snake moves on its scaly belly, but far stiffer and slower. Abruptly
Keene sent his metal boot crashing into one. It shattered with a
blue flash of released static electricity, and the pieces passively
resumed their progress…
…”They’re—well—on the borderline. They’re chemical-crystalline
growths, and their movement is purely mechanical. There are half a
dozen varieties—aluminum feeders and iron and silicon and sulphur
feeders, and others.”…
The Red Peri
Aluminum Feeders take the form of greyish-white accretions of
crystals. They move in “streams” which flow from one deposit of
aluminum to the next. If they come into contact with aluminum
compounds (such as a spacesuit boot) they immediately start to
spawn seed crystals which incorporate the metal into their
structure, leaving the metal pitted as they grow. Although they are
slow-moving, they can eat through pure metal very quickly, and
were seen to absorb alum compounds; it seems likely that they
would be able to eat the aluminum in concrete in a similar manner.

After the first expeditions Pluto
languished
in
relative
obscurity;
scientists were interested, but although
there were abundant metal deposits
none were quite worth the immense
costs of transportation, and it was
simply too remote and inaccessible for
casual visits. All of which made it the
perfect lair for pirates with an unusually
fast ship…
If Keene reported his conversations
with Peri Maclane accurately, and they
are assumed to be an accurate account
of events, construction of the pirate
base must have begun circa 2068-70.
Losses to piracy rose dramatically from
2071, with most of the increase blamed
on the Red Peri. It’s likely that the base
would have remained undiscovered if
not for sheer chance; in 2086 Keene’s
ship made an emergency landing near
the pirate base. He was captured, but
made a daring escape, capturing the
pirate leader herself. Unfortunately she
escaped en route to Earth, and it must
be assumed that the pirates subsequently
moved their base to a new location.
The base was built into caves and its
facilities included gardens and a farm,
accommodation for about a hundred
pirates and their dependents, atomic
power plants, life support equipment,
mines, workshops, and everything else
needed to support their operations. Air
was obtained by melting the frozen
atmosphere that surrounded the base,
which
made
complex
recycling
unnecessary.
The base seems to have been a testbed for new technology such as the
electrostatic field used to keep air inside
the base. Construction must have been
fraught with difficulties, especially since
the caves were home to most of the
crawler species.
It’s generally assumed that it was
abandoned after Keene escaped; anyone
who finds it may be able to salvage
some interesting equipment. Always
assuming the owners aren’t still there…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 71 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Islands in the Sky

Crawlers

Each crystal “organism” has
BODY 1-3, MIND – , SOUL –
They do not attack in any conventional
sense – they seem to have some ability to
sense the materials they feed on and
move towards them, but don’t use any
skill to do so. If they make contact they
start to convert the target material into
more crystals. This should be handled by
rolling the crawler’s BODY against the
target’s BODY, with the following results:
A. Minor damage (equivalent to Flesh
wound if the target is human)
B. Serious damage (equivalent to Injury
if the target is human)
C. Critical. The crawler’s BODY is
increased by 1; the target’s BODY is
reduced by 1 PERMANENTLY, as a
portion of the target is converted to
crystal.
Attacks continue until the crawler is
somehow removed from the target, e.g.
by amputation, by rubbing off the
crystals, or by damaging them so severely
that they can no longer grow. Most forms
of damage simply split the crystals and
turn the crawler into two or more smaller
organisms, but repeated damage such as
crushing or fire will eventually reduce the
crawler to inanimate components.
Since this can very easily be a lethal or
permanently disabling attack referees are
encouraged to give players ample warning
of the danger, and set things up so that
there is an escape route that avoids
contact with the crystals. Kill off NPCs or
important bits of equipment first!
While The Red Peri doesn’t explain
how the iron feeders were kept under
control, it’s obvious that there was some
way to handle them without them
spreading uncontrollably. One possibility
is a chemical treatment that disrupts their
crystalline structure; it’s mentioned that
there are no copper feeders, so perhaps a
little copper sulphate kills them. Their
“life” is based on electrostatic charges, so
something like a bug zapper might work.
Whatever is used will work on all types.

Carbon Feeders are described as needle-like black crystals.
They appear to move faster than aluminum feeders and can eat
through a leather shoe in seconds, going on to attack the flesh
underneath. They could devour a man in minutes.
Keene did not see Iron Feeders, but the pirate Peri Maclane
used them to eat through the doors of safes and other steel
objects. It’s apparent that she could control them; if they were
uncontrolled they would have reduced the entire safe to crystals,
soon to be followed by the ship!
Since Keene’s report was published most of Earth’s
governments have banned the importation of crawler crystals;
penalties range from heavy fines to imprisonment. Boyd’s of
London has announced that carriage of crawlers invalidates their
policies, and most other insurers have followed suit. They are
too dangerous to be allowed anywhere near modern technology.
Does anything eat crawlers? If they are confined to a single
complex of caves there may be nothing, but it seems unlikely
that Maclane’s father just happened to pick the only site where
they occur. It’s more likely that they are widespread, found in
many caves on Pluto. If so there may be undiscovered species.
Predators are an obvious possibility – the crawlers have to work
hard to find and extract the metals they need, and their bodies
are made of nearly pure metal. Something that ate them would
save energy, and might be more intelligent than the essentially
mindless crystals.

Adventure Idea: Big Bang Theory
Crawlers would be a perfect tool for mining, if they could be handled
safely and modified to extract something more useful that iron or
carbon. Gold or uranium would be good, for example…
The adventurers should be scientists, hired by a major mining
company to work on the problem. The company owns several old
uranium mines which probably still contain ore traces but are
uneconomical to work by existing methods. Somehow a small batch
of iron feeders has fallen into company hands; nobody seems to know
where they come from, in anything other than the vaguest of terms,
and anyone who asks too many questions may find themselves looking
for a new job. The project has several phases; the scientists need to
develop a way of controlling the crystals and persuading them to
breed, preferably at temperatures a little higher than Pluto, somehow
modify them to extract uranium or radium, and work out how to
recapture them and extract the metals. It’s just a little illegal to work
on this on Earth, but the company has enough clout to keep
inspectors off the scientist’s backs.
Of course a project that works well in the lab may not necessarily
work so well in the field. And if there’s more uranium than
anticipated in the mine, it’s possible that things may eventually get a
little critical…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 72 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

A League of Nations Patrol ship passing Phobos en route to Earth.

Detail from Patrol recruiting poster, circa 2110

“…they don’t realize that you have to land blind, because three hundred feet down from the ground the
blast begins to splash against it.
“You watch the ravelled poles at the edge of the field and try to judge your altitude from them, but you
don’t see the ground; what you see under you are the flames of Hell… … lowering a ship is like bringing
down a dinner plate balanced on a fishing rod. If she starts to roll sideways—blooey!...”
… Piloting a ship is just a question of following directions, but plotting a course involves the calculus of
function, and that, let me tell you, takes a mathematician. I could do it, and Claire handled a simple route
well enough—one had to in rocket racing—but astrogators were not common even among pilots.
You see, the difficulty is that you don’t just point the ship at your destination, because that destination is
moving; you head for where the planet will be when you arrive. And in this case, assuming Gogrol meant to
make for Io, a journey from Europa to that world meant speeding in the direction of the colossal mass of
Jupiter, and if a rocket once passed the critical velocity in that direction—good night!
Redemption Cairn

Between Planets

S

PACE is big and inhospitable, and travelling through it is a highly skilled job, whose
main features often seem to be a lack of sleep, long hours of tedious but painstaking
routine, and occasional moments of terror. Stress-related illness is common; pilots
are especially likely to burn out comparatively young, but engineers and other personnel
aren’t immune from problems. Most think it’s worth it; they’re working at the cutting
edge of technology and pursuing man’s oldest dream, to reach for the stars.

That’s one way of looking at things. Another is that space travel is one of the main driving
forces of Earth’s economy. Every ship represents at least ten thousand jobs on the ground, and
an investment of millions of dollars. Their cargo is essential for dozens of industries, from the
luxury fur trade to power production and pharmaceuticals.

There are dozens of other viewpoints, of course. For colonists and explorers space is the ultimate
frontier, for scientists it’s an endlessly interesting field of study, for hopeful hunters, prospectors and
merchants it’s where they’ll get rich. But for most of these people space travel is simply a means to an
end, a necessity that makes these pursuits possible but is otherwise irrelevant to their interests. They’re
interested in the destination, not the journey itself, and the actual nuts and bolts of spacecraft only
become important if something goes wrong.
The technology that makes it all possible is the atomic blast, and a major part of pilot and engineer
training is taken up with these deceptively simple devices. But life support, astrogation, and dozens of
other technologies are almost as important and should not be overlooked, especially when a ship is being
designed. What follows is a very brief overview of a very complex subject.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 73 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Hull Design

Tetrahedral Hulls
Tetrahedral hulls were tested early in the
history of space flight then for the most
part abandoned when it was found that
their apparent advantages were illusory.
Recent interest mostly stems from
descriptions of the pirate ship Red Peri,
which tend to minimise the drawbacks.
Briefly, ships of this design mount their
main engine above the hull, attached to a
tripod girder arrangement. The hull forms
an equilateral triangle, with the engine
firing down through the triangle.
There is a widespread but erroneous
belief, even amongst scientists and
engineers who should know better, that
tetrahedral hulls offer advantages over
conventional designs. This is untrue, and
there are several snags:
• Fuel must be conveyed “uphill” to the
engine; at emergency power, with high
“g” forces, this imposes considerable
strain on the fuel handling equipment.
• Great care must be taken to keep
weight of fuel and cargo distributed
symmetrically through the hull, much
more so than for a conventional hull.
With a conventional hull heavy items
can be stowed near the central axis of
the ship, to minimise turning forces;
with a tetrahedral design this is
impossible.
• The hull is exposed to hot exhaust and
radiation from the engines, especially
during takeoffs and landings, and is
more likely to be damaged by it.
• The girders are heavier than engine
supports in conventional ships.
• It is difficult to service the engine and
fuel system in flight.
Continued next page

Most civilian spacecraft are built to a simple vertical cigar
design; the ship takes off and lands vertically, and all engines
(apart from a few small jets used for steering) are permanently
aimed aft. Usually such ships are fitted
with retractable tripod landing gear or
fixed fins (as in the racing ship shown
landing in the illustration) which
incorporate steering jets and fixed landing
gear. These designs are simple and
reasonably robust, but difficult to handle
(especially in atmosphere and during
landings) and may be unsuitable for poorly
prepared landing sites. The main
advantage is high capacity – since the hull
layout is kept simple and there is only one
flight mode, a relatively small part of the
hull is occupied by engines and other
engineering components. This ratio
improves with larger hulls, since there is an irreducible
minimum size for atomic blasts and many other components.
Decks are circular, making it very easy to stow cargo as near as
possible to the central axis of the ship.
The main alternative, preferred for military and exploratory
ships, is a streamlined hull capable of sustained horizontal flight
in atmosphere, often adding small wings for extra lift. Ships of
this design usually take off and land on underjets, auxiliary
blasts pointed downward at 90º to the length of the hull, and
the deck layout is optimized for the horizontal orientation used
when the ship is under gravity. Not only does this add
considerably to the mass and complexity of the atomic blasts
and associated engineering components, the extra
complications of operating with two “downs” invariably leads
to engineering complications in other areas; for example, the
plumbing must be designed so that it works when the ship is on
the ground, with gravity pulling water etc. downwards, as well
as in space, when acceleration pulls water etc. aft. Although
spacecraft cruising acceleration is low, the extra direction adds
considerably to the cost and complexity of fittings such as
showers and lavatories, galley facilities, etc. Rockets for pointto-point flights in atmosphere (e.g. on the London to New
York route) are invariably built to this design; while the fastest
ships take ballistic routes and leave the atmosphere for at least
part of each flight, they are essentially rocket planes, not
spacecraft.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 74 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

“…they use a minute amount of uranium or radium as
catalyst to release the energy in the fuel. Uranium has low
activity; it will set off only metals like the alkalis, and ships using
uranium motors burn salt. And radium, being more active, will
set off the metals from iron to copper; so ships using a radium
initiator usually burn one of the commoner iron or copper ores.”
“I know all that,” I grunted. “And the heavier the metal, the
greater the power from its disintegration…”
“…Well, Gunderson wanted to use still heavier elements.
That required a source of rays more penetrating than those from
radium, and he knew of only one available source—Element 91,
protactinium…”
Redemption Cairn

Tetrahedral Hulls (continued)

The only real advantages of these designs
are that they are slightly more
manoeuvrable than a cigar-shaped hull,
and that they keep the engine in a
position that allows it to be jettisoned
relatively easily. This can be advantageous
when dealing with unstable engines; with
sufficient warning the engine can be
released, usually with a small supply of
fuel, so that it accelerates ahead of the
ship and is a few miles away by the time
it explodes or melts. A replacement can
then be fitted, hopefully before the ship
has gone off course or crashed.
It should be noted here that the
designer of the Red Peri, Perry McClane,
was an expert on atomic blasts, and may
have “souped up” the engines to an
extent that would be illegal for
commercial or military use.

If You Have To Ask…
An early brine-fuelled atomic blast used in the Ares – Time-Life

Atomic Blasts

Spaceships are designed and built by
gigantic corporations, not individuals, and
for the most part are operated by
corporations, governments, and large
scientific institutions. Exceptions (such as
the racing craft Golden Flash described at
the beginning of Redemption Cairn) are
toys of the rich; if you have to ask how
much they cost you probably can’t afford
one.
In short, the captain of a ship may
know how much it’s worth, and probably
several of the officers know roughly how
much it costs to run, how much cargo it
can carry, its range, etc., but for game
purposes these details are usually best left
as vague as possible. This section includes
very simple construction rules, which do
include prices if they are needed, but it’s
mainly an overview of the technology
which can be used for plot ideas etc.

Atomic blasts are deceptively simple; reactor chambers in which
radioactive rays break down the atoms of fuel to release energy,
which in turn helps to break down more fuel. Uranium-based
blasts convert sodium compounds into energy; radium blasts use
iron or copper compounds; experimental protactinium blasts run
on lead. Only a small proportion of the fuel is converted to
energy; the rest is converted to basic particles which are thrown
away as the reaction mass whose recoil propels the ship. The
proportion is lowest in uranium blasts, highest in protactinium
blasts.
Blasts are most efficient and reliable when fuel passes through
slowly and there is time for as much as possible of the fuel to
disintegrate and convert to energy, but at the most efficient
settings the total energy output is insufficient for takeoffs and
landings. Higher power can be achieved by feeding the fuel
more rapidly, but this is wasteful; at full emergency power (the term “emergency” is used advisedly,
prolonged use leads to damaged engines) nearly all the fuel is wasted. A side effect is a flare of energy – a
bright exhaust in space, flames in atmosphere – as unused fuel is released as superheated gas. This
limitation applies to all atomic blasts, regardless of type.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 75 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Higher sustained power can be achieved with existing technology, but all methods are expensive,
decrease reliability or add significantly to the proportion of the size and weight of the ship taken up by
the engines, fuel consumption, etc. While progress is being made, only a few specialised courier ships are
known to have sustained cruising acceleration better than 0.03g – the Red Peri may achieve 0.05g or
better, but features of its design, discussed above, suggest that it does so at the expense of safety. The
table shows accelerations for the Ares (the first ship to Mars) and some modern vessels, and travel times
from Earth to Mars when the worlds are closest.
If range was the only consideration all current
Cruising
Emergency Earth – Mars
ships would have radium blasts, but things aren’t
Acceleration Power
(days)
that simple. Uranium engines are cheap, reliable – The Ares
0.010g
2.5g
20.2
3.0g
16.5
they’ve been around for a century, and most bugs Modern freighter 0.015g
0.030g
3.0g
11.7
are engineered out – and use evaporated sea water, Modern liner
Fast courier
0.040g
2.5
10.1
or salt from the flats of Venus or the silted canals
The Red Peri
0.050g ?
5.0g ?
9.0
of Mar, as fuel. Ground-based power plants and
short-range craft (e.g. from London to New York, between the moons of Jupiter) often use sea water as
fuel, accepting that most of the mass will be wasted. Sodium salts are abundant and readily available on
Earth and most of the rest of the solar system; iron is even more abundant, but less likely to be found in
easily-used forms. Copper gives a little more power, but the ore is too expensive for routine use.
Although protactinium drives will be more powerful, the radioactive component will be in short supply
for the foreseeable future, and lead is comparatively rare and expensive; it seems likely that these drives
will only be economic for flights to the most inaccessible metal-rich worlds, Mercury and Pluto.
Uranium-fuelled spaceship engines generally run on granular salt, with density around 2 tons per cubic
metre. It’s often asked why salts are preferred to metallic solids – in this case the explanation is simple;
metallic sodium is less dense (and would take up more room aboard ship) and much more dangerous to
handle than salt, and very expensive to manufacture. When the atomic blast is operating at its highest
efficiency about 80% of the fuel is eventually converted to elementary particles; this includes the chlorine
in salt, so its mass isn’t wasted. It’s obviously more efficient and considerably cheaper to run on salt.
With radium engines the answer isn’t so simple. Iron and copper are denser than their salts, so it would
be preferable to feed these engines the pure metals, and some experimental engines run on copper or
iron wire, iron filings, etc. The problem is that all of the prior engineering art relates to salt, and pure
metal engines have a distressing tendency to overheat, jam, explode or otherwise malfunction. Insurers
refuse to cover their use in civilian spacecraft. For now most radium engines run on powdered iron ore,
with density about five tons per cubic metre. If these problems can be solved iron-fed engines would store
up to 7.8 tons of fuel per cubic metre, copper-fed engines up to 8.9 tons per cubic metre.
The development of protactinium engines is focusing on designs which will use pure lead as fuel, either
molten metal or fed in as
Planet Distance from Solar escape Surface Escape
Orbital
wire or lead shot, with
Sun
(AU)
velocity
KPS
Gravity
Velocity
KPS
velocity KPS
density 11.3 tons/m3. So far Mercury
0.39
67.7 0.4g
4.3
47.9
progress is slow.
Venus
0.72
49.5 0.7g
10.3
35.0
When planning a flight it’s
Earth
1.00
42.1 1.0g
11.2
29.8
necessary to take numerous
Mars
1.52
34.1 0.4g
5.0
24.1
factors into an account; these
Ceres
2.77
25.3 0.03g
0.5
17.9
Jupiter
5.20
18.5 2.5g
59.5
13.1
include
the
positions,
Saturn
9.54
13.6 1.1g
35.6
9.6
distances and orbital speeds
Uranus
19.22
9.6
0.9g
21.2
6.8
of the planets, whether the
Neptune
30.06
7.7
1.1g
23.6
5.4
ship is going “uphill” away
Pluto 29.7 to 49.3
7.8 or less 1.2g
12.9
4.7
from the Sun or “downhill”

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 76 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

towards it, the gravity and escape velocities of the planets themselves, availability of fuel at the
destination, etc. Routes between Venus, Earth, and Mars are the easiest to plan; distances, gravitation and
escape velocities are comparatively small, and orbital speeds aren’t wildly different. Mercury’s high orbital
speed and position deep inside the Sun’s gravity well make it a much more difficult destination, while the
huge distances to the outer planets, and their high escape velocities, add their own problems. The table
above compares these factors for the planets and for Ceres, the largest asteroid.
For example, a flight from Venus to Earth requires takeoff acceleration to reach an escape velocity of
10.3 KPS (or, rather, to reach an orbit where the escape velocity is lower, then accelerate more gently),
a 5.2 KPS change in orbital velocity, and a 7 KPS change in velocity to overcome the Sun’s gravity and
reach a “higher” orbit, and another 11.2 KPS change to land. Some of these changes add up, others
cancel each other out, and all ignore the additional velocity changes needed to make the trip usefully fast.
Calculating courses and velocity changes for an entire journey is a hugely complicated process, made
possible only by specialised mechano-electrical calculating engines, regularly updated astro-navigation
tables, and accurate charts. Fortunately most of the work is now routine; every ship comes with a set of
simplified calculation tables, as in the example below, which indicates how much fuel is needed for a given
journey, accurately enough to give their owners an approximate cost for the voyage. All other things
being equal fuel use is proportional to travel time and distance; there are complications such as the extra
power needed to overcome the intense gravity of the Sun at Mercury’s orbit, the gravity of Jupiter and
other giant planets, eccentricity and inclination of orbits, and so forth, but the simplified table shows the
most common routes and compares travel time and fuel consumption when planets are at their closest,
with Earth-Mars taken as the “standard” journey: the “fudge factor” is a rough correction, the extra fuel
needed to compensate for gravity and other factors in calculations. These factors can be counter-intuitive;
for example, Ceres might seem an easier destination than (for example) Mars because its gravity is low,
but this is cancelled out by the
Earth to: Mercury
Venus
Mars
Ceres Jupiter Saturn
fact that the asteroid’s low gravity
Days at 0.015g
18.2
12.4
16.5
31.0
47.8
68.0
makes it harder to match orbits
Days at 0.030g
12.9
8.7
11.7
22.0
33.8
48.1
with it.
Days at 0.050g
10.0
6.8
9.0
17.0
26.2
37.3
The Asteroid Belt adds an
2.0
1.25
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.1
extra complication, since ships “fudge factor” 1.0 x
1
1
Fuel
2.2
0.9
1.0
1.9
3.5
4.51
must often detour or make
1
emergency
course
changes,
Plus optional reserve for asteroid avoidance
Moons
of
Jupiter
to:
Another
Saturn
Uranus Neptune
Pluto
reducing fuel reserves. Most ships
moon
(Titan)
passing through the belt allow a
Days at 0.015g
1 to 2
48.4
86.7
116.2 136.7
10% reserve for this purpose,
Days at 0.030g
1 to 2
34.2
61.3
82.2
96.7
and refuel at one or another of
Days at 0.050g
1 to 2
26.5
47.5
63.7
74.9
Jupiter’s moons or Titan, rather
2
2
0.5
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.1
than travelling directly to their “fudge factor” 1.2 x
destinations.
Fuel
< 0.1
3.9
7.6
10.1
11.0
2
Needless to say, all of the
Assumes a landing on the world itself, not a moon
above is hugely over-simplified.
Saturn (Titan) to:
Uranus Neptune
Pluto
While these rough calculations are
Days at 0.015g
71.9
105.7 127.8
adequate for estimating rough
Days at 0.030g
50.9
74.7
90.4
costs and travel times, a precise
Days at 0.050g
39.4
57.9
70.0
analysis may involve twenty or
2
2
1.2
1.2
1.1
more pages of tables, and dozens “fudge factor” 1.1 x
Fuel
5.8
8.5
9.4
of complex equations.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 77 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

“…it would take us just exactly four years and three months. We’ve got food enough for three months, but
what would we live on during the four years? Atomic energy?”
The Red Peri

Life Support

Tubes of chlorella algae growing in low gravity
Scientific American April 2082

Most people assume that the engines are the most complicated part of a ship. They’re wrong. As any
spaceship engineer can testify, the most complicated systems, and the ones that give the most problems,
are those needed to keep the passengers and crew alive and healthy; water and air purification on all
ships, and waste recycling and food production on ships that have the room and need for it.
In the early days of space flight only air and water were recycled, and in fairly rudimentary ways.
Air was cooled to remove water vapour, filtered through charcoal to remove dust and the most
obvious odours, then processed through sodium peroxide compounds which absorb carbon dioxide and
release oxygen. This was far from a perfect process, requiring large amounts of the chemical which were
dead weight for most of the flight, and the air had to be topped up with more oxygen occasionally. While
more sophisticated systems are still used today there is always some waste, and some need for additional
chemicals and oxygen during the course of a flight.
Waste water and its inevitable contaminants were processed by evaporation, and any dried residues
were periodically dumped overboard. Most recent designs work at extremely high pressures and add
oxygen to the waste water; high-pressure oxygenated water is an extremely good solvent, and the
treatment dissolves most contaminants and breaks them down into their component elements, so that the
eventual end products are water, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and sterile ash, usually a mixture of metal
oxides. The power needed for evaporation isn’t a problem, but there is inevitably some wastage, and even
in the early days occasional passengers experienced psychological problems related to their consumption
of water which, for all its purity, had previously been contaminated with human wastes. One reason for
this is only obvious in hindsight; recycled water was originally completely flat and tasteless, lacking any of
the contaminants and additives found in tap water on Earth, and the lack of taste was a subtle reminder of
its origin. Today’s systems aerate the water and add traces of fluorine, dissolved salts and other impurities,
which combine to make it much more palatable.
While these processes get rid of wastes, they require oxygen, water, chemicals, and other consumables.
The long-term goal of this branch of engineering is to replace them with systems that waste nothing and if
possible produce excess oxygen and consumables such as food. For this biological systems are needed;
algae, plants and other organisms which produce food and oxygen directly. Typically a mixture of water
and nutrients derived from wastes is used to culture aquatic algae, which produces oxygen by
photosynthesis. Mature algae is processed to make foods, or fed to small fish which can eventually be
eaten without processing. The largest installations add beds of fungi and small fast-growing terrestrial
plants, such as cress and bean sprouts, which thrive in artificial light and low gravity. It can take weeks to
months to set up a balanced ecology and keep things stable, and the processes must be monitored and
maintained even when a ship is on the ground. But once it’s working it can greatly reduce the need for
packaged foods and liquid oxygen.
Currently this equipment is bulky and heavy, with the most modern and efficient
designs weighing several tons plus a quarter ton or so per person supplied, and is
impractical for smaller ships and those on short flights; for example, it isn’t used on
the Earth-Mars and Earth-Venus routes, since ordinary supplies and basic air and
water recycling are more than adequate for such short journeys. For longer journeys
the equipment is lighter than normal stores, but comparatively expensive; ship owners
must decide if the investment is worthwhile. The main goals of research are to reduce
costs, and to improve the flavours and varieties of the foods produced this way.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 78 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Weapons
“Cut your jets!” it repeated. “Cut your jets, or we’ll top
you!”
Captain Ten Eyck ended his mutterings in a heavy sigh. He
had no wish to have his vessel exposed to the withering blast of
the pirate. He grumbled an order into the box beside him, and
the roar of the jets ceased. Whatever maneuverability the
lumbering freighter possessed was gone now; there was no
longer any chance of ramming the agile attacker.
The Red Peri
...[when] a blunt little League rocket appeared in answer to
Hawkin’s call, he informed its officers flatly that the pirate was
hopelessly beyond reach. “Even if your fat beeste of a boat
could match its acceleration, which it couldn’t.”
Ibid.
While the League has a fleet, its role is generally limited to
police functions such as piracy suppression, and the weapons
carried are much less destructive than the ship’s atomic blasts.
Most powerful weapons are banned by the Interplanetary Peace
Treaty, and are in any case too heavy to be taken into space.
The distances involved, and the improbability of forcing another
ship into combat, make specialised military spaceships expensive
white elephants. League patrol ships are multi-purposed designs
whose weapons (heavy machine guns firing explosive rounds,
blasters, and repeating flame guns) are mainly intended for
clearing a landing area or for use against ground targets such as
Venusian “dough-pots.” These and other weapons are discussed
in a later section. They can fire at another ship if they get close
enough, but this is so rare, and the results are potentially so
disastrous, that it’s very much a last resort.
Piracy is only possible because civilian ships travel on known
routes and schedules, so that interception can be planned days
or weeks in advance, and because the most successful pirate ship
is considerably faster and more manoeuvrable than any
opponent. Even the Red Peri is essentially unarmed, apart from
hand weapons; its captain relies on intercepting and outmanoeuvring slow civilian ships at the beginning or end of their
flights, threatening them with the ship’s blast, then looting and
escaping before League ships can reach the scene.
All modern ships are armoured well enough to protect their
passengers against collisions with small meteors and meteoric
dust, to resist solar heat while approaching Venus or Mercury,
and to withstand the backwash of their own nuclear flames
during takeoffs and landings. Their armour is not adequate to
resist explosives, blasters, etc. or withstand a serious collision
such as an attempt to ram another ship.

The Interplanetary Peace Treaty
Red! The color of the space ships of Io!
For, since the signing of the
Interplanetary Peace Treaty, each planet
colored its space ships differently.
Tidal Moon
Although there has never been an
interplanetary war as such, there have
been several disagreements which could
have potentially resulted in war. The
Interplanetary Peace Treaty was framed
to limit the damage such a war might
cause by regulating the armaments and
permitted conduct of spacecraft. Ships
which do not obey treaty provisions, such
as pirates, are treated as outlaws.
Weapon systems (such as guns and
bomb bays) may not be installed on
civilian ships. Passengers and crew may
carry weapons, but they must not be able
to fire at targets outside the ship – for
example, it would be illegal to rig a gun
port so that someone inside a ship could
fire at another ship.
Military ships such as the League fleet
and those of national governments may
carry external armaments including flame
guns, machine guns up to 50mm calibre,
and explosive bombs, but may not be
equipped to drop atomic bombs or carry
heavier weapons.
Ships are expected to obey the laws of
all applicable planetary and interplanetary
authorities, including flight regulations,
prohibited areas, etc.
All ships must be colour-coded and
marked to allow easy identification and
show their world (or moon) of origin; for
example, red in the case of Io. Additional
markings might include the flag of the
colonial nation which operates a colony
world, identification numbers and letters,
a space line’s insignia, etc.
Finally, every possible effort must be
made to minimise casualties, rescue
survivors, treat prisoners humanely, etc.
The League fleet is authorised to
enforce these regulations and to intercept
and inspect ships to make sure that they
comply with the regulations.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 79 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

The Laws of Space
Everyone who works in space is expected
to be familiar with the laws applicable to
space travel, which for the most part are
derived from the earlier laws of the sea.
The most important for civilian vessels
are those related to their ownership and
command. This sounds simple, but ships
are rarely commanded by their owners,
and their captains are expected to have a
good deal of autonomy, while being
responsible for the safety and profitability
of the ship. A captain must sometimes
disobey the owner’s instructions; this can
be considered anything from a justified
use of authority to outright theft of the
ship, depending on the circumstances.
Diverting from the instructed course in
order to aid other travellers is, as at sea,
permitted and indeed expected.
The most serious crimes are
considered to be piracy and mutiny.
The textbook definition of piracy is
“The crime of robbery of ships in flight.
Accusation, trial and punishment of
pirates may be under interplanetary
agreement applicable anywhere, or under
the laws of the particular nation or
colony where the accused has been
captured.” The effects of piracy in space
are potentially so serious that the British
Empire and several of the other League
nations automatically treat it as a capital
offence, unless there are very unusual
extenuating circumstances.
Mutiny is defined as “The unlawful
resistance of a superior officer, or the
raising of commotions and disturbances
on board of a ship against the authority
of its commander.” It is generally treated
as a serious criminal offence, but is not
normally regarded as a capital crime
unless someone is hurt. Note that it is
possible to simultaneously obey the
orders of a ship’s owners and disobey a
superior officer if the captain and/or
officers are acting against the wishes of
the
owners.
Other
extenuating
circumstances might include illegal,
dangerous or contradictory orders, etc.
Continued next page.

Shipboard Routine and Duties
…On short runs like Venus or Mars, a vessel could carry three
pilots, and then it’s a simple matter of three eight-hour shifts. But
on any longer run, because air and weight and fuel and food are all
precious, no rocket ever carries more than two pilots.
So a day’s run is divided into four shifts, and each pilot has one
long spell of eight hours, then four hours off, then four hours on
again for his short shift, and then eight hours to sleep. He eats two
of his meals right at the control desk, and the third during his short
free period…
Redemption Cairn
Space travel generally involves some busy moments, especially at
the beginning and ends of a flight, with long periods of boredom
in between. Outsiders rarely appreciate that boredom is the best
sign that things are going well; amongst space crew it’s
considered bad luck to wish anyone an interesting flight.
Preparations begin days to weeks before takeoff, with careful
planning of the route, fuel, food and water, etc. It’s essential to
know the mass to be carried, although there is some allowance
for error. Loading is considerably more complicated than for
any surface ship, since mass must be distributed as symmetrically
as possible around the main axis of the ship. Most ports employ
a loadmaster, an official whose job is simply to superintend this
process and make sure that there are no errors. It’s a job that’s
often given to pilots and engineers between flights. The
loadmaster must be aware of the mass of every item taken
aboard, and make sure that it’s balanced as closely as possible.
Poor cargo distribution can cause navigation errors and wasted
fuel, and has to be taken very seriously. On ships with ventral
underjets the loadmaster must also make sure that cargo and
other masses are distributed symmetrically along the length of
the ship, as well as around its central axis. This is one of the
reasons why the simpler vertically-landing cigar shape is greatly
preferred for passenger ships and freighters.
Meanwhile the flight plan must be carefully prepared; ships
on routine flights generally have the work done by a groundbased specialist, but exploratory ships and tramp freighters must
carry an astrogator capable of planning the next stage of a flight.
As noted, it can take several days of painstaking mathematics to
work out every detail. Naturally all pilots must be competent
navigators, able to check the ship’s position and correct errors,
but this is much easier than preparing an entire flight plan.
The final hours before takeoff are usually extremely busy,
with final checks of equipment and supplies continuing up to the
moment of takeoff.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 80 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Taking off, and accelerating to escape velocity under full
emergency power, test the pilot’s and engineer’s skill, and the
ship itself. The engines and hull are under enormous stress and
the ship is most heavily laden with fuel, supplies, etc. If anything
goes wrong the effects can range from loss of power or fuel to a
catastrophic explosion. Errors in navigation are potentially more
serious than at any other time in a flight; a tiny mistake early on
can have massive cumulative effects weeks later.
Acceleration is reduced to cruise settings as soon as possible
after takeoff, and all available hands must then check the ship
for problems; leaks and blast malfunctions are fortunately rare,
but cargoes and stores sometimes break loose from their straps
under the stress of takeoff, delicate equipment can go wrong,
and it’s a rare ship that doesn’t lose a few lights, cups, and
plates.
Once these immediate problems have been handled the next
step is to rig the ship for low acceleration. Depending on the
design this might involve moving bunks from the “deck” to the
wall, and other changes to take advantage of a low-gravity
environment. The engineer has to adjust the blast for maximum
efficiency, which can take an hour or two. If there are first-time
travellers aboard some will probably be feeling very ill at this
point, though the nausea usually passes in a day or two. Panic
attacks are also possible if there’s an undiagnosed claustrophobic
aboard, or anyone with an unusual fear of falling.
Once any immediate problems have been handled there’s
usually a small celebration; aboard Commonwealth ships this is
usually the point at which the first rum ration of the voyage is
issued, other nationalities have their own customs.
Once the ship is cruising life aboard ship is best described as
boring, with the low acceleration adding an extra complication
to life. It isn’t enough to simulate Earth-like conditions, and is
easily confused with free fall, but it’s still strong enough to cause
occasional accidents. Objects left in mid-air slowly accelerate aft,
and although nobody is known to have been killed as a result, at
least one crewman has broken an arm after falling asleep at the
forward end of a large hold. While it would be convenient to
design ships so that the “acceleration down” is always towards
the deck, that’s only possible with ships that will always land
stern-first, liners and freighters.
In flight spacefarers wear magnetic shoes (or boots with
spacesuits); with training they learn to instinctively keep one
foot anchored at all times, and brace themselves to compensate
for the barely-perceptible tug of acceleration. Everyday activities
such as washing and showering, cooking, eating and drinking are
fraught with complications. There is also a long-term medical
risk; prolonged low gravity can lead to muscle and bone damage.

The Laws of Space (continued)
Barratry is a civil offence, often
committed as an adjunct to a criminal
act. It generally involves the captain
knowingly acting against his duty to the
owners, and committing an illegal act, in
such a way that the owners sustain injury.
Common forms of barratry include
condoning smuggling, helping the owners
of cargo to commit insurance fraud by
“accidentally” damaging it, taking bribes
to delay departure so that a competitor
of the owner gains an advantage, selling
equipment, stores or the ship itself, etc.
The laws governing this offence are
complex; the main reason why it is
important is that it a factor determining
the liability of a ship’s owners if the ship
is used for criminal purposes.
Marooning is fortunately rare; it’s the
offence of abandoning crew or passengers
in such a manner that there is little
chance of rescue. Given conditions in
space this is often an automatic death
sentence, and unjustifiable marooning is
generally treated as murder.

The Customs of Space
As at sea, there are considered to be
customs of space travel related to
conduct in extreme emergencies. These
customs may excuse cannibalism if one of
more of the survivors of a wreck dies
after food runs out, lotteries for a lethal
injection if air is certain to run out before
rescue can arrive, etc.
Each case is decided on its own
merits; outright murder is never
condoned, but the courts recognise that
under conditions of great stress mistakes
are likely to be made, and often
commute sentences in such cases.
The League’s courts treat any appeal
to these customs with great suspicion,
since they are easily abused, and are very
wary of setting precedents which
condone unnecessary criminal acts,
especially murder. Since there have been
cases in which an emergency has been
faked to cover a murder, the courts are
wise to be cautious.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 81 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Qualifications
Pilots need skill, training, and natural
aptitude. Training obviously focuses on
piloting, but also includes engineering and
navigation, radio operation, etc. It may
also include business skills and (in the case
of passenger ships) basic etiquette and
other ‘people skills.’
The senior pilot is often also First
Officer or Captain, with responsibility for
the safety and security of the ship, contact
with officials, etc.

Pilot Qualifications
Fully qualified spaceship pilots need Pilot 6
or better with at least two points spent on
the skill, representing a prolonged training
course.
At least one point each must be spent
on Babbage Engine (Astrogator), on Morse
Code, on Scientist (Astronomy), and on
Mechanic (Space ship systems). If the pilot
is also going to prepare flight plans the
minimum qualifications are Babbage Engine
(Astrogator) 7 and Scientist (Astronomy)
7.
Additional useful skills include Business,
Psychology, and First Aid.
Engineers must be Jacks of all trades, at
home repairing an atomic blast, a radio
transmitter, an air purifier, a meteorite
puncture or a dripping shower. Most time
is probably devoted to keeping the atomic
blast running efficiently, to keeping it from
failing altogether at full power, and to
routine maintenance of life support
equipment, with real emergencies a
comparative rarity.
Training includes nuclear physics,
electrical and mechanical engineering,
plumbing, chemistry, and more; for
example, on exploratory ships the engineer
is often the armourer.

Engineer Qualifications
Qualified engineers need Mechanic (Space
ship systems) 7 or better and must spend
two or more points on Scientist
(Engineering, Nuclear Physics). Additional
useful skills include Marksman (gunsmith)
and First Aid. Scientist (Botany) is useful
for ships with algae farms.

Daily exercise and a regime of calcium-fixing tablets are a
necessity. On the largest ships the medical officer has the duty
of ensuring that everyone remains fit; on smaller ships this duty
usually falls to whichever officer has taken a first aid course
most recently. Hypochondria is regrettably common.
The busiest officers are the pilots and the engineer, who
must work together to compensate for any variation in the
atomic blast. The engineer also needs to keep an eye on the
fuel and supplies to make sure that their mass continues to be
distributed as evenly as possible around the ship as they are
used. Course and speed can also be affected by space dust,
meteor impacts, the gravity of nearby asteroids and moons,
and dozens of other factors. It’s especially important to
maintain constant watches within a million miles of any planet,
and everywhere in the Asteroid Belt.
Ideally every ship would have three pilots on rotating eight
hour watches and at least two engineers; this is practical on the
largest liners and freighters on the inner planet routes, but
outside the orbit of Mars it’s rarely possible since the extra
personnel and stores would add too much extra mass. Most
ships on outer planet routes make do with one engineer and
two pilots alternating eight-hour and four-hour shifts. It’s not
ideal, especially if a problem arises while the engineer is asleep,
and stress related illnesses are common.
The last stage of any flight is landing. It’s often the time of
greatest danger, especially on unexplored territory, but even a
routine landing at a spaceport can cause problems, especially
with the larger freighters and liners. An error on takeoff is
rarely fatal; the smallest miscalculation while landing can be
catastrophic. Preparations usually begin at least a day before
arrival; as at takeoff, all cargo and stores must be stowed as
close as possible to the centre line of the ship, and everything
must be secured to prevent accidents. All bunks etc. have to
be moved back to their high acceleration positions. The last
hour or so of the flight is a tense wait for full-power
deceleration to begin, followed by a period of discomfort and
(hopefully) a reasonably gentle landing.
Assuming that nothing goes wrong, duties don’t end when
the ship lands, even in port; the crew is usually busy until it
takes off again. The atomic blast can only be serviced or
replaced when it is shut down, and many other servicing jobs
are much easier under gravity or in an atmosphere. Cargo and
passengers must be unloaded, and there are often bureaucratic
hurdles to be jumped before a ship can be prepared for its next
flight. If fuel, water, or air is loaded it must be checked for
contamination and properly stored. It’s a never-ending process
involving all officers and crew who aren’t on leave.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 82 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Ship-Building
Spaceships are big, incredibly complicated, and extremely expensive. They’re usually built for a specific
purpose, and often for a specific route. That isn’t surprising; a freighter on a slow run to Jupiter is a very
different matter to a passenger ship on the Venus run, a short-range ferry flying between Jupiter’s moons,
or a League patrol ship combing the asteroids for pirates. Each has its own requirements in equipment,
supplies, and fuel. While there are a few general purpose ships, typically freighters whose holds can
optionally be used for fuel and supplies instead of cargo, they’re the exception rather than the rule.
They’re probably the ships of most interest to adventurers, and fortunately come onto the market
reasonably often – they’re expensive to run compared to ships designed for a specific route or mission, so
their owners often have to sell them off in a hurry.

Step 1 – Payload
The first step in designing a ship is to calculate the payload; the total tonnage it will carry, excluding
atomic blasts but including fuel. Calculations for cargo are simple – a ton of cargo is a ton of cargo, plus
the weight of the hold etc. – but crew and passengers need more thought, with total tonnage varying
according to the amount of space allocated per person, and more importantly the duration of the flight.
Cramped accommodation, shared cabins, etc.
0.3 tons / person
$500 / person
Individual cabins, moderate comfort
0.6 tons / person
$1200 / person
Luxurious accommodation
1.5 tons / person
$2500 / person
Life support equipment
0.2 tons / person
$150 / person
1
Algae “farm” food unit
4.5 tons and up
$20000 and up1
2
Supplies / person (includes water, food, air etc.) 0.3 tons / person / wk
$25 / person / wk2
Head (shower and lavatory)
0.4 tons
$2800
Galley (small / large)
0.6 tons /1.5 tons3
$2500 / $75003
Cargo (hold including mass of cargo)
1.1 tons / ton
$250 / ton
Fuel (hold or tank including mass of fuel)
1.1 tons / ton
$250 / ton
Controls, per pilot
0.5 tons / pilot
$1200 / pilot
Radio (short range, approx 1000 miles)
0.1 tons
$5004
Radio (interplanetary range)
1.5 tons
$150004
Meteor warning device
0.1 tons
$1200
Electric “plumb” altimeter
0.1 tons
$1200
Multi-function meteor warning / plumb
0.1 tons
$1800
Air lock
0.5 tons
$2500
Space suit recharge point
0.1 tons
$11005
6
Fixed weapon (machine gun or flame gun)
0.2 tons / weapon
See below
6
Turret for weapons
0.5 tons + weapons
$5500
1

Add .25 tons and $500 per person to be supplied, e.g. a unit to supply 56 people weighs 18.5 tons and costs
$48000. If one of these units is fitted the requirement for other supplies is reduced by a third.
2
Use the total tonnage of supplies to calculate how much capacity is needed to store them, using cargo space at 1.1
tons / $250 per ton of supplies.
3
$2500 / 0.6 tons buys a minimum galley suitable for e.g. a crew of four or five. $7500 / 1.5 tons buys a galley
suitable for a liner, capable of serving a sitting of up to 25 passengers or crew.
4
Radio range varies with atmosphere etc. on planets. At interplanetary distances Morse code must be used.
5
$1100 covers the equipment needed to refill, recharge, and repair up to six spacesuits at a time, but not the
spacesuits themselves. Their mass is too low to be considered during the ship design process.
6
Weapon weights include ammunition and mounts. Turret mass and costs include motors etc. Up to two weapons
may be mounted in a turret at 0.2 tons / weapon. Weapon costs are $750 (machine gun), $3000 (flame gun).
Prices include a full load of ammunition if needed. Not available (legally) to civilian purchasers.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 83 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Example: Aardkin (The Red Peri) was designed for the lucrative inner planet routes, Earth-Mars and EarthVenus. She’s equipped to cruise at 0.03g, so most flights will take less than two weeks. She carries 20
tons of cargo, 100 tons of fuel, six crew, and 50 passengers, and is equipped with three heads and a
galley that can serve up to 20 people in a single sitting. The control room is set up for two pilots with a
short-range radio and meteor warning device. The ship has an air lock and two space suit recharge points:
Cramped accommodation, 46 persons
Individual cabins, 8 persons
Luxurious accommodation, 2 persons
3 heads
Large galley
20 tons cargo
100 tons fuel
Life support equipment for 56 persons
Storage for supplies; 56 persons for two weeks
Controls for two pilots
Short range radio
Meteor warning device
2 space suit recharge points
Air lock
Totals

13.8
4.8
3.0
1.2
1.5
22.0
110
11.2
37.0
1.0
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.5

tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons

$23000
$9600
$5000
$8400
$7500
$5000
$25000
$8400
$8500
$2400
$500
$1200
$2200
$2500

206.4 tons

$109940

Life support supplies cost $2,800 per flight. If the Aardkin is refitted with an algae farm unit to supply
everyone aboard it will weigh 18.5 tons and cost $48000, but the tonnage of the other supplies needed
for a two-week journey is reduced from 38 tons to 25.3 tons costing $1,867. On a longer route this
would make sense, if the ship always runs at full capacity, but for the Inner Planet runs ordinary supplies
and chemical recycling are cheaper and weigh less; the owners decide that the expense isn’t justified.
Example: Golden Flash (Redemption Cairn) is a racing rocket designed for the Curry Cup race from the
Earth, around the Moon, and back to Earth, about half a million miles. Normally this flight would take a
day or so, but racing rockets spend most of the flight at full emergency power and can make it in a few
hours. For safety reasons they carry supplies for a full week and a short range radio. The pilot wears a
space suit throughout the flight. There is no airlock. Meals are pre-packed sandwiches and energy bars,
sanitary facilities are basically a bottle and absorbent pads inside the suit and some wet wipes.
Cramped accommodation, one person
10 tons fuel
Life support equipment for one person
Storage for supplies; one person, one week
Controls for one pilot
Short range radio
Totals

0.3
11.0
0.2
0.33
0.5
0.1

tons
tons
tons
tons
tons
tons

$500
$1250
$150
$82.50
$1200
$500

12.43 tons

$4932.50

Step 2 – Engines
The next step is to determine the type of engines fitted, whether they are to be used in the standard
vertical hull or a horizontally-landing design with wings and underjets, and the cruising and emergency
power expected. Some of these decisions may make it necessary to change prices from Step 1; most
notably, adopting a horizontal design adds 25% to the weight of galleys and heads, and 50% to their
cost, due to the extra complexity of the plumbing etc. they need.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 84 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

The basic formula for calculating the total mass of the blasts needed for a ship is as follows:
1. Multiply the mass of the payload in tons by 0.05
2. Multiply the result by the maximum emergency power in gravities
3. Add 2.5% for each 0.005g at cruising speed
4. Add 25% if the ship is designed for prolonged horizontal atmospheric flight with wings, underjets etc.
5. For radium blasts subtract 5%; for protactinium blasts (when available) subtract 10%.
6. For racing engines designed to operate on full power for extended periods add 25% to the mass.
To
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

calculate the cost of engines:
Multiply the total mass of the engines in tons by $5000
Multiply the result by 1.5 x the maximum emergency power in gravities
Add 5% for each 0.005g at cruising power.
Double the cost if the ship is designed for prolonged horizontal atmospheric flight with underjets etc.
For radium blasts add 25%; for protactinium blasts add 50% (once commercial production begins)
For racing engines designed to operate at emergency power for extended periods add 50%. Note
that there is a BIG impact on fuel consumption, reliability, engine life, etc.

Example: Aardkin is equipped to cruise at 0.03g with emergency power of 3g, has uranium engines, and takes off
and lands vertically without prolonged horizontal flight. Her payload weight is 206.4 tons.
1. Payload = 206.4 tons so basic engine mass = 10.32 tons
2. Emergency power = 3g so engine mass becomes 10.32 x 3 = 30.96 tons
3. Cruising power = 0.03g so engine mass becomes 30.96 + 15% = 35.6 tons
There are no other modifiers, so the final engine mass is 35.6 tons.
1. Engine mass = 71.19 tons so basic engine cost = $178,020
2. Emergency power = 3g so cost is multiplied by 4.5 = $534,060
3. Cruising acceleration is 0.03g so cost rises by 30% = $694,278
There are no other modifiers, so the final engine cost is $694,278
This takes the Aardkin’s totals to 242 tons and $804,228
Example: Golden Flash is a racing rocket designed for short fast flights. She has a radium engine. She takes off and
mostly flies at 3g, and cruises at 0.03g when she isn’t racing; her payload is only 12.43 tons.
1. Payload = 12.43 tons so basic engine mass = 0.62 tons
2. Emergency power = 3g so engine mass becomes 0.62 x 3 = 1.86 tons
3. She cruises at 0.03g so engine mass becomes 1.86 + 15% = 2.14 tons
4. There are no modifiers for flight mode
5. The radium engine reduces engine mass by 5% = 2.04 tons.
6. Prolonged acceleration adds 25% engine mass = 2.55 tons
Engine mass = 2.55 tons
1. Engine mass = 2.55 tons so basic engine cost = $12,731
2. Emergency power = 3g so cost becomes $38,193
3. Cruising power = 0.03g so cost becomes $49,651
4. Add 25% for a radium engine = $62,064
5. Add 50% for a racing engine = $93,096
This takes the Golden Flash’s totals to 14.98 tons and $98,028

As well as the above costs for engine construction, there are ongoing costs for engine maintenance and
refurbishment, roughly 0.5% of engine costs per year (excluding labour), DOUBLING for each year
without a full service. Without such maintenance the reliability and power output of atomic blasts is
slowly impaired, due to (for example) build-up of lead in a uranium engine [A Martian Odyssey], erosion
of the exhaust nozzles, etc.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 85 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Example: Aardkin is serviced regularly every year. It costs $694,278 x 0.5% = $3,471.38 a year.
Example: Due to Claire Avery’s financial problems the Golden Flash isn’t serviced for four years. Her engines cost
$93,096 so the first year cost would have been $466, after four years the cost is $3,728

Step 3 – Fuel and Range
The calculations for fuel consumption are relatively simple:
• Fuel per day at cruising power is the cruising acceleration multiplied by 50% of the ship’s total mass.
• Fuel per hour at emergency power is emergency acceleration multiplied by 4% of the total mass.
• Multiply the result by 1.2 for uranium engines, by 1.1 for radium engines. Leave it unchanged for
protactinium engines.
Most flights begin and end at full emergency power so it’s usual to assume at least a quarter of an hour of
emergency power at each end of a flight.
Fuel for uranium and radium blasts is relatively cheap, but protactinium blasts will be expensive to run:
• Fuel-grade salt for uranium blasts costs about a dollar a ton on Earth and on Ganymede; it’s a byproduct of the most common type of power plant, extracted from sea water. It’s more expensive on
some of the other worlds; $2.50 a ton on Mars, $25.00 a ton on Venus (where it has to be
transported from the bright side through the Hotland swamps to the Cool Country colonies), and up
to $50 a ton on Io, which has no reserves and must import it from Ganymede.
• Fuel-grade iron ore for radium blasts costs about $5.00 a ton on Earth, $40 a ton on Venus, $20 on
Mars, Ganymede, and Titan.
• Fuel-grade copper ore costs $15 / ton on Earth and up to $40 a ton elsewhere. It isn’t available on
Venus or Mars. In view of its price it is normally reserved for emergency use.
• Fuel costs for protactinium blasts haven’t been determined as of 2115; lead and its ores are relatively
rare and expensive on Earth, around $50 a ton, and unobtainable on Mars and Venus. It’s relatively
abundant on Mercury, and a by-product of Titan’s gold mines, but to date no large deposits have
been found on the moons of Jupiter, although what is known of Europa’s geology suggests that it
ought to be found there. Pluto probably has good supplies too.
Example: Aardkin is equipped to cruise at 0.03g with emergency power of 3g. Her mass is 242 tons. She has
uranium blasts.
Cruising fuel consumption is thus 0.03 x 242 x 0.5 x 1.2 tons / day = 4.36 tons / day
Emergency power consumption is 3 x 242 x .04 tons / hour = 34.85 tons / hour
Her longest flight is usually the Mars run; about 12 days at 0.03g when the planets are in conjunction. Assuming
a 12 day flight with about a half hour of emergency power at each end gives roughly 12 x 4.36 tons = 52.3 tons
+ 35 tons = 87.3 tons. Aardkin’s 100-ton fuel capacity allows for another three days of flight, which extends her
range significantly and allows flight for several weeks either side of conjunction. She always flies with a full fuel load,
costing $100 on Earth, $250 on Mars, and $2500 on Venus.
Example: Golden Flash is equipped to fly from point to point on Earth or race in space at 3g, with cruising speed of
0.03g when she isn’t racing. Her mass is 15.0 tons. She has radium blasts.
Cruising fuel consumption is .25 tons / day
Emergency power consumption is 1.98 tons / hour, her tanks are empty after 5.08 hours
Her normal racing flight is the Earth-Moon-Earth circuit; this would be about six hours at constant emergency
power, but ships in this class don’t carry quite enough fuel for that, so part of the flight must be at cruising power.

The author’s web site for Forgotten Futures XI includes a spreadsheet template, ships.xls, which speeds
these calculations considerably. Small changes in e.g. fuel capacity can sometimes have surprising
consequences; for example, reducing the Golden Flash to five tons of fuel cuts the duration of full power

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 86 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

by only 36 minutes and reduces the ship’s price by more than $40,000 – raising it to 20 tons adds only
fourteen minutes and almost doubles the cost of the ship!
Step 4 – Game Data
All ships have BODY and some degree of armour protection. Many also have modifiers for skill rolls such
as Pilot, Engineer, etc. Some of the Traits described in the next section can also affect skill rolls,
BODY is calculated as 5 plus the square root of the mass of the ship in tons, rounded UP. Normally there
are no other modifiers, but the Sturdy trait below can add BODY.
Armour is 1/10th the BODY of the ship rounded UP. It can also be affected by the Sturdy trait.
The following skill modifiers may also come into play:
• If the ship is designed for prolonged horizontal atmospheric flight with underjets etc. add +1 to Pilot
skill during landings and takeoffs, but raise the Difficulty of all Engineering-related skill rolls +1.
• If the ship has a racing engine raise the difficulty of all Engineering and Pilot skill rolls +1.
• If the ship has a Uranium blast reduce the Difficulty of any engineer skill rolls related to the Blast, fuel
systems, etc. – this is old, well understood technology, and most of the bugs have long been solved.
• If the ship has an experimental protactinium blast raise the Difficulty of any engineer skill rolls related
to the Blast, fuel systems, etc. +2.
Example: Aardkin’s total mass is 242 tons; the square root is 15.56, rounded up to 16, plus 5 = BODY 21. The
ship’s armour rating is thus 2.1 (rounded up as 3, or -3 Effect on all attacks). She has a Uranium blast so the
Difficulty of all engineering-related skill rolls is reduced -1.
Example: Golden Flash has a mass of 15.0 tons; the square root is 3.9, raised to 4, plus 5 = BODY 9. The ship’s
armour rating is thus 1. She has a racing engine so the Difficulty of Engineering and Pilot-related skill rolls is raised
+1.

Step 5 – Traits
The final step in designing a ship is to give it a few traits, qualities which affect its reputation, crew
morale, and possibly performance. Most are rated as positive or negative; there must be at least one
negative trait for each positive trait. Traits which cancel each other out (e.g. Beautiful with Slovenly,
Lucky with Unlucky) should not be used. It’s suggested that no more than four or five traits should be
allocated to a ship.
Beautiful: The ship has unusually good looks, and most people would consider it to be the most beautiful
example of its type. The reaction is generally favourable, but there might be e.g. an assumption that
the owners are wealthy and can be overcharged, that the crew are snobs, etc. This is a Positive trait,
but anything that seriously messes up the ship’s looks will turn it into a Laughing-Stock instead.
Comfortable: Someone got things right when the ship was designed and built. She’s comfortable, with
(for example) unusually roomy cabins, a particularly good galley, especially good soundproofing. This
is a Positive trait but is often paired with negative traits such as Expensive.
Cramped: Someone tried to fit too much equipment or too many passengers and crew into too small a
hull. Cabins have very little elbow room, barely holding the allotted numbers of passengers or crew,
corridors are narrow and obstructed. This is common for military and racing ships and ships on the
outer planet routes to e.g. Titan. If it’s a passenger ship the crew will experience constant complaints.
A Negative trait.
Cranky: The ship is just a little temperamental in some respect; e.g. the atomic blast only switches to
cruising power if the engineer hits exactly the right spot with a hammer, there’s an odd rattle in the life

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 87 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

support system that nobody seems to be able to get rid of, etc. This should not represent a lifethreatening problem, it’s just a quirk, but is still a Negative trait. Note that this trait can be combined
with Reliable, to represent a ship that performs well in most respects but has a couple of odd quirks.
Expensive: The ship costs a lot to run, with (for example) unusually high life support costs, engines that
are no longer made and need costly spares, especially luxurious cabins. A Negative trait; often paired
with e.g. Luxurious. The referee should determine which aspect of the ship is especially costly.
Famous: The ship is well known; possibly it broke a speed record or was the first to land on a particular
asteroid or moon, possibly it had a famous captain or was involved in some historical incident. As a
result most people know the ship’s name and respond to it reasonably well, which might affect e.g. the
fare that’s charged for a cabin, the willingness of port authorities to cooperate with its officers, etc.
This is a Positive trait – the down side is that any negative incident that affects the ship’s reputation will
immediately make it Notorious or a Laughing-Stock instead.
Haunted: There’s a story (which may be true) that the ship is haunted. This might be the ghost of a
former captain, someone who was killed when it was built, or the random victim of some space-going
accident such as a meteor strike. If true, psychically gifted visitors to the ship will swear that they’ve
seen something supernatural. This can be Positive (the ghost is helpful), Negative (the ghost is
unhelpful or dangerous), or Neutral (there is no ghost / it’s not interested in interacting with anyone
aboard) as the referee prefers. See FF IV and FF VIII for more on ghosts.
Laughing-Stock: Some incident has made the ship’s name into a joke, and one that her crew hear all too
often. She isn’t Notorious as such; the reaction is affectionate rather than hostile. Nevertheless it’s a
Negative trait.
Lively: The ship handles unusually well and is very responsive to its controls, +1 to all Piloting skill rolls.
The down side is that all rolls must be made, even those that would normally be automatic successes,
since errors have an immediate effect. This is a Positive trait. It cannot be combined with Stable.
Lucky: For some reason things usually go well aboard this ship; pilot errors cancel out, there’s usually
more fuel left than expected, and accidents have minimal consequences. To simulate this, players
should re-roll any failed roll which affects the ship as a whole, and use the more favourable of the two
results. This counts as TWO Positive traits, and cannot be paired with Unlucky.
Luxurious: Every detail of the ship (or at least the parts used by passengers) is designed for maximum
ostentatious comfort, the best possible appearance, the best food, etc., regardless of impact on the
ship’s total mass, handling, etc. This is counted as a Positive trait; however, the movements of
luxurious ships invariably attract a lot of attention, from the press, pirates, and anyone else likely to
take an interest, which may lead to problems if the adventurers are trying to be inconspicuous.
Luxurious ships must have the Expensive trait too.
New: The ship is fresh out of the yards, with state-of-the-art atomic blast, brand new air purifiers, etc.
etc. This is a Positive trait; the snag, of course, is that everything is new and untested. If there are any
problems with a ship or its components they invariably turn up during the first few flights.
Noisy: For some reason the ship makes more noise than usual. On a short flight it’s a nuisance; on a long
flight it may be necessary to wear hearing protection, especially in the engine compartments, and use
ear plugs to ensure a good night’s sleep. This is optionally a sign of impending equipment failure; on
the other hand, it may be something that the right engineer can easily fix. This is a Negative trait.
Notorious: Everyone’s heard of the ship, and not in a good way. Something nasty happened aboard, or
some crime was committed by passengers or the crew; maybe there was a mutiny, suicide or murder,
maybe the ship ignored a distress signal and left others to die. There are many possibilities. Changing
the ship’s name isn’t enough to get rid of the problem – somehow the truth always gets out. The only
way to get rid of the stain is by some unusual act of heroism. Always a Negative trait.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 88 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Old: The ship is reaching the end of its service life, and may be due (or overdue) for expensive repairs
and servicing. Performance definitely won’t be new or state of the art. This is generally considered a
Negative trait; on the other hand anything that was likely to go seriously wrong has probably already
done so. Old ships may be Beautiful and/or Reliable, but are often Cranky.
Reliable: The ship performs well; not flashily so, but there are few engineering problems and mostly they
are easily solved. To simulate this reduce the Difficulty of engineering rolls for most equipment
problems; this does not apply to e.g. repairing damage from meteor impacts or a crash landing. This is
a Positive trait; note that it may still be combined with Cranky, representing a ship that performs well
in most respects but still has one or two quirks.
Slovenly: The ship has a reputation for poor housekeeping, slack discipline, strange little animals hiding in
the cargo space, etc. This is a Negative trait most common in freighters.
Smelly: Something is wrong with the life support equipment and nobody can find the cause; it isn’t bad
enough to be life-threatening (although the engineer needs to make sure that things don’t get any
worse), but it’s annoying on short flights. On long flights everyone eventually gets used to the smell,
and will be surprised if anyone mentions it. Another Negative trait most common in freighters.
Stable: The ship is unusually tolerant of things that would normally cause minor course changes;
movement of mass around the ship, fluctuations in drive power, etc. Pilots will need to make routine
course adjustments less often, and the Difficulty of routine manoeuvres is reduced -1. However,
stability comes at the price of poor handling if an emergency course change is needed, with Difficulty
raised +1. This is nevertheless a Positive trait. It cannot be combined with Lively.
Sturdy: The ship was built unusually strongly; add either 5 or 10 BODY, but also 5% or 10% total mass
and 5% or 10% fuel consumption, and raises the armour protection of the hull +1 or +2. Other
qualities are not affected. A Neutral quality.
Ugly: Something about the ship is unusually ugly. This may be the proportions or shape of the hull, an
unfortunate combination of paint colours in its national and company insignia, or anything else that
seems appropriate. A Negative trait, most common in ships designed for industrial applications such as
mining ships, which cannot be combined with Beautiful.
Unlucky: Things tend to go badly aboard this ship; anything that can go wrong will do so, usually at the
worst possible moment. If she lands on level ground it will turn out to be the only quicksand for miles
around, if there is contraband aboard the customs inspectors will find it, if someone drops a gun it will
fire. This doesn’t usually change the difficulty or result of skill rolls, unless the referee is feeling
unusually sadistic, but any failed roll will have the worst possible consequences. This counts as TWO
Negative traits, and cannot be combined with Lucky.
Referees should feel free to invent more traits according to the needs of adventures, and to allow or ban
traits invented by players.
Example: Aardkin is Comfortable (she’s a well-regarded liner) and Reliable (she’s flown the Mars and Venus routes
for several years without any engineering problems but Unlucky (she’s attacked by pirates). The Reliable trait
reduces the Difficulty of engineering skill rolls -1, for a total -2 Difficulty modifier
Example: Golden Flash is Beautiful (one of the classic small racing ships) and Famous (the first Curry Cup winner to
be piloted by a woman) but Cramped (the down-side of all racing ships) and Noisy (she has a big loud racing engine
and most of the sound absorbent materials used in larger ships have been omitted to save weight.

The final details that should be added to a ship record are its ownership, role, history, etc. as in the
examples that follow. The Red Peri is NOT described; the referee should feel free to “fudge” its
performance beyond the limits of these rules.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 89 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Aardkin (The Red Peri): Large Dutch passenger/ freighter rocket on the Inner Planet routes, best known as one of
the victims of the pirate Red Peri.
242 tons, $804,228.
40 passengers (and 6 crew) in cramped accommodation, 8 individual cabins, 2 luxury cabins, 3 heads, large galley,
life support and supplies for maximum 2 weeks, Life support supply cost $2,800 per flight. 20 tons cargo.
Two pilots, short-range radio, meteor warning device, 2 spacesuit recharge points, air lock
Uranium engines, Cruise 0.03g, Emergency power 3g, 100 tons fuel (15 days at cruising power)
Engine maintenance cost $3,472 P/A.
BODY 21, Hull armour 3. Comfortable, Reliable, Unlucky. -2 Difficulty Engineering skill rolls.
Golden Flash (Redemption Cairn): Single-seater racing rocket, best known as the first ship captained by a woman to
win the Curry Cup race around the Moon.
15.0 tons, $98,028
1 crew in cramped accommodation, life support and supplies for 1 week, life support supply cost $25.
One pilot, short-range radio.
Radium racing engine, Cruise 0.03g, Emergency power 3g, 10 tons fuel (5 hours at full thrust, 40 days cruise)
Engine maintenance cost $466 P/A.
BODY 9, Hull armour 1, Beautiful, Famous, Cramped, Noisy. +1 Difficulty Pilot and Engineering skill rolls.
Christiaan Huygens: Planetary Lines passenger / freighter rocket on the Outer Planet route serving the moons of
Jupiter and Titan, capable of the Earth-Titan run in a single stage.
867 tons, $2,008,321
15 passengers (and 5 crew) in cramped accommodation, 3 passengers (and 2 officers) in individual cabins, 2 heads,
large galley, life support and supplies for maximum 10 weeks (supplemented by algae farm), life support supply cost
$6,500 per flight. 20 tons cargo.
Two pilots, short-range radio, meteor warning device, air lock, 2 spacesuit recharge points.
Radium engine, Cruise 0.015g, Emergency power 2.5g, 600 tons fuel (84 days at cruising power),
Engine maintenance cost $8,819 P/A.
BODY 35, Hull armour 4, Cramped, Reliable, -1 Difficulty routine Engineering skill rolls.
Hera and Minos (Redemption Cairn): Elderly Planetary Lines freighters designed for the Earth-Jupiter and JupiterSaturn routes, used for the Gunderson expedition to Europa and the follow-up expedition.
232 tons, $484,295
4 cramped accommodation, 4 individual cabins, life support and supplies for 8 weeks (supplemented by algae
farm), head, small galley, life support supply cost $1,600 per flight. 10 tons cargo.
Two pilots, short-range radio, meteor warning / electric plumb, air lock, 1 spacesuit recharge point.
Uranium engine, cruise 0.015g, Emergency power 2.5g, 150 tons fuel (72 days at cruising power)
Engine maintenance cost $1,976 P/A
BODY 21, Hull armour 3, Comfortable, Old, -1 Difficulty routine Engineering skill rolls.
HMSS Endeavour: One of the British ships assigned to the League of Nations Patrol, primarily a police craft but used
for exploration, diplomacy, etc. Capable of Earth-Jupiter, Jupiter-Saturn, etc.
301.27 tons, $1,352,641
6 cramped accommodation, life support and supplies for 5 weeks, 1 head, small galley, life support supply cost
$750 per flight. 10 tons cargo.
Two pilots, long-range radio, meteor warning / electric plumb, air lock, 1 spacesuit recharge point
Radium engine, horizontal landing on underjets, cruise 0.03g, emergency power 3g, 200 tons fuel (40 days at
cruising power).
Engine maintenance cost $6,243 P/A
4 machine guns (fixed mount firing forward), 2 turret-mounted flame guns (forward arc)
BODY 23, Hull armour 3, Cramped, Lively, -2 Difficulty Pilot skill rolls, +1 Difficulty Engineering skill rolls.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 90 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Accessorising
Spaceships are important, but their occupants need many other items of equipment, for use during or
after the journey, from space suits and thermoskins to vehicles, tents, cameras, and tools. What follows
can’t hope to be an all-inclusive list, but it hopefully touches most of the main bases.

Vehicles
Auxiliary Rocket: The first expedition to Mars carried two auxiliary rockets, small craft designed for
survey work. These craft were suitable for atmospheric flight only, and were designed to carry two
passengers with minimal comfort. These craft proved useful, but the small atomic blasts were
unreliable. Later exploratory ships were built for greater atmospheric range, as it was realised that the
fuel needed to carry such a heavy craft was more useful than the craft itself. Auxiliary rockets are now
almost forgotten, but small winged rockets with similar specifications are still used for transport on
some of the colony moons such as Io and Titan.
Two-seat winged rocket for atmospheric flight.
3.7 tons, $5,689
2 crew in cramped accommodation, life support and supplies for 1 week, life support supply cost $50.
One pilot, short-range radio, 3 cameras.
Uranium racing engine, Cruise 0.01g, Emergency power 1g, 1 ton fuel (5.44 hours at full thrust, approx. 15
hours in normal flight under Mars gravity), maximum speed around 250 MPH.
Engine maintenance cost $12 P/A.
BODY 7, Hull armour 1, Agile, Cramped, Noisy. -1 Difficulty Piloting, +2 Difficulty Engineering skill rolls.

Gyro: These small vehicles are essentially winged helicopters with the rotor blades shrouded in their
wings. They are most suited to worlds with comparatively dense atmospheres such as Earth and Venus.
They run on small uranium-fuelled power packs, and have a range of several hundred miles on a few
pounds of salt. The models sold for off-world use are designed for “easy” assembly from a crate-full of
components. In practice this takes an engineer several hours and a lot of swearing.
2-seater with ¼-ton cargo capacity – $500 and up (Earth price) – 120 MPH – BODY 6, mass 0.7 tons*
2-seater with 2-ton cargo capacity – $800 and up (Earth price) – 90 MPH – BODY 8, mass 1.2 tons*
4-seater with ½-ton cargo capacity – $1200 and up (Earth price) – 100 MPH – BODY 8, mass 1.0 ton*
They are designed to be easy to fly, -1 Difficulty to all Pilot rolls.
*Excludes passengers & cargo

Ground Car: Provided that the terrain isn’t too rugged, soft, or overgrown, there’s a lot to be said for a
ground car. Off-world models are usually four-wheel drive, made of lightweight alloys, with uranium
power packs and minimal comforts. They’re mostly used in colonial cities, but occasionally
encountered elsewhere. Some examples are shown below; naturally there are larger and faster variants.
They are usually shipped with the wheels, windscreen, etc. removed to minimise the size of the crate.
Assembly takes an hour or two but doesn’t need any special skills; it’s no harder than changing a tyre.
Various options are available, all adding cost and weight. These include amphibious capability
(extra-large tyres, an auxiliary propeller, flotation tanks and waterproofing), armour, weapons etc.
2-seater with ¼-ton cargo capacity – $300 and up (Earth price) – 60 MPH – BODY 6, mass 0.7 tons*
2-seater with 2-ton cargo capacity – $350 and up (Earth price) – 50 MPH – BODY 6, mass 1.0 ton*
4-seater with ½-ton cargo capacity – $450 and up (Earth price) – 60 MPH – BODY 7, mass 1.0 ton*
*Excludes passengers & cargo
For amphibious models add 10% to mass and 20% to cost and reduce speed by 10 MPH
For an armoured shell add 5% mass and 10% cost and reduce speed by 5 MPH per point of armour, e.g. 3
armour adds 15% mass, 30% cost, and reduces speed by 15 MPH.
For weapons see prices etc. in the next chapter.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 91 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Space suit: The iconic protective garment is a space suit, but most
people never wear one unless they venture onto an airless moon or
need to make repairs outside a ship’s hull. “Soft” suits protect
against vacuum, moderate radioactivity, and moderate heat and
cold – typically -50ºC to 150ºC – and incorporate magnetic
boots, a short-range radio, sockets to allow a cable to be used for
private conversations, and an 8-hour air supply, with chemical
absorption of carbon dioxide and other contaminants such as
ammonia and water vapour. An absorbent pad provides basic
sanitary facilities, and a nozzle in the helmet, controlled by an
external valve, allows the wearer to drink water, an energy drink,
or a stimulant (usually strong caffeine solution). The helmet also
mounts a light and a microphone and speaker to allow the wearer
to talk in atmosphere. These suits are made in several sizes, and
usually there is an approximate fit available for anyone who needs
one, but to avoid discomfort suits need to be tailored precisely to
the wearer, at extra cost. The main materials used are woven glass fibre with silicone rubber sealant for
the suit itself, an aluminium helmet with a clear Sillicellu® visor, and hard silicone rubber with magnetic
inserts for the boots. The lining is absorbent rubber and nylon. It offers limited armour protection, but
the silicone rubber is self-sealing for small punctures including small-calibre bullets.
For more extreme conditions a hard suit may be preferred. This has jointed aluminium armour and
layers of insulation, extra heating or cooling systems, extra radiation screening, pincers instead of
gloves, etc. according to the needs of the purchaser. Each extra system adds mass that must be carried
by the wearer; on low gravity moons this isn’t a problem, although the added mass can hamper
movement, but on worlds such as Pluto, whose gravity exceeds that of Earth, the extra mass can cause
fatigue and limits endurance.
All space suits need occasional recharge and repair. The standard recharge centre built into most
ships can refill up to six suits at a time, but more can be recharged by doing it in shifts. Complete
recharging and replenishment of the air recycling system takes about twenty minutes; much more time
is required if repairs are needed, of course.
“Soft” space suit – $600 (Earth price) – 50 lb suit, 0.1 tons suit plus recharging equipment, supplies, stores,
etc. BODY 5, Armour 1. Add $50 for a suit tailored to a perfect fit.
“Hard” space suit – $1100 (Earth price) – 80 lb suit, 0.1 tons suit plus recharging equipment, supplies, stores,
etc. BODY 7, Armour 3. Add $120 for a suit tailored to a perfect fit.
• Extra heating system for above, good down to absolute zero; add 20lb, $250
• Extra cooling system for above, good up to 350°C – add 25lb, $200
• Extra cooling system for above, good up to 500°C – add 50lb, $400, requires umbilical connection to
cooling plant aboard ship, mass 100lb
• Radiation screening for above, adequate for all routine atomic blast work – add 25lb, $75
• Steel armour for above, raises armour to 5 – adds 50lb, $200.
• Waterproofing and pressure-resistant modification for underwater work – adds 30lb, $200
Example: A hard suit modified for a perfect fit, with radiation screening and heating to absolute zero, would cost
$2100+$120+$100+$350 = $2,670 and would mass 80+20+25lb = 125lb
Space suit liner – $10 – negligible mass. Soft long underwear with replaceable absorbent pads, $5 for 24 pads.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 92 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Testing a hard suit for extreme cold on Titan - Smithsonian 2088

Protective Clothing

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

Transkin™ oversuit & filter mask: Essential for anyone venturing into the swamps of Venus, a Transkin™
oversuit is claimed to offer perfect protection against all spores, fungi, etc.; they are also widely used
in e.g. the chemical industry, since the material is good protection against most acids and alkalis. The
material resembles grey opaque rubber, and covers all of the body. The material forms a hood around
the head, with the face plate and filter mask attached by a quick-release locking ring. Facilities inside
the suit include a water pouch and pockets for spare filters, Thermide™ tablets, etc. The standard
package for Venus also includes a water bottle and filter, a Transkin™ back-pack for supplies, and mud
shoes.
Transkin™ has one serious flaw; although it’s tough it isn’t self-sealing, punctures etc. must be
repaired with a patch kit. Of course even the tiniest puncture will let in enough spores to kill the
wearer of a suit in minutes, so that’s rarely a problem in itself.
Transkin™ is a good insulator, but under Venusian conditions it tends to keep heat in so that the
wearer is usually uncomfortably warm and extremely sweaty. Most wearers wear t-shirts and shorts
under the suits, to prevent chafing, anything more will soon be a soggy uncomfortable mess.
Transkin™ Oversuit – $85 – 25lb. Includes suit, face plate, filter mask, repair kit, back pack, 200 Thermide™
tablets, 1 pack 50 filter inserts, water flask and mesh screen, mud shoes. BODY 5, reduces Effect of blows etc.
(but not puncture wounds) -1. Walking in mud shoes requires an Athlete or BODY roll against Difficulty 4; after
some experience success is automatic.
Replacement filter inserts – $5 pack 50 – mass negligible.
Thermide tablets – $7.50 pack 200 – mass negligible

Cold-Weather Clothing: Since the first expedition to Mars there have been many
attempts to perfect cold weather clothing, but the essentials still remain much the
same as they have always been; heavily-insulated parkas, boots, and trousers, with
face masks and Sillicellu® visors. Modern synthetic sponge “rubber” insulators are
efficient enough that the main problem for wearers is often the need to get rid of the
moisture from the wearer’s sweat, which can reduce the effectiveness of the
insulation. On Mars insulated clothing and a Thermo-skin sleeping bag will handle all
conditions that visitors are likely to encounter. On Titan similar clothing is used, but
thicker insulation and electrical heating are needed due to the constant winds.
On Ganymede this clothing is combined with an electrically-heated “vacuum
suit,” an undersuit resembling a rubber diving suit; given conditions on this moon it’s
almost impossible to avoid immersion in icy water, which ruins normal insulation.
The drawbacks are cost and heaviness, since the “vacuum suit” actually consists of
two waterproof layers separated by a grid of electrically-heated wires, with a radium
power pack, all built strongly to maximise ruggedness.
For more extreme environments space suits are probably the best answer.
Basic cold weather gear – $55 – 20lb. BODY 2, Includes insulated parka, trousers, and boots, fur hood, face
mask, Sillicellu® visor. Armour 2 versus blows etc., 1 versus knives etc. Add $25 and 5lb for Titan.
Ganymede “vacuum” suit – $100 – 45lb. BODY 3, undersuit BODY 2. Includes insulated heated waterproof
undersuit, Sillicellu® visor, radium power pack, trousers, parka and boots. Armour 2 versus blows etc., 1 versus
knives etc. Damage to the undersuit may cut off the power to the heating system.

Magnetic Footwear: Made in a range of styles, from industrial work boots to high fashion, magnetic
footwear performs the simple but essential job of (literally) keeping its wearers grounded under
conditions of zero or near-zero gravity. There are dozens of different versions, all designed so that they
stick to a steel surface with sufficient force to prevent accidental release, while coming away easily as

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 93 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Between Planets

the wearer walks. The method is actually surprisingly simple; each shoe contains
a strong magnet near the heel, and a weaker magnet under the ball of the foot.
The example illustrated has a ferrite magnet ring embedded in the leather sole
(part of the covering has been removed for clarity) with magnetic rubber (a
mixture of synthetic rubber and a barium ferrite compound) in the middle of the
ferrite ring and under the ball of the foot. As the heel comes into contact with a
steel surface the relatively weak magnetic rubber takes effect first, pulling the
foot close enough for the stronger ferrite magnet to add more force. The
magnetic rubber under the ball of the foot adds more attraction. If the wearer
walks forward the natural movement of the foot and ankle lifts the ferrite
magnet far enough away that it’s easy to pull the heel free, while retaining some
anchorage via the magnetic rubber under the ball. This isn’t quite as easy as walking under gravity –
care must be taken to avoid pulling both shoes free simultaneously – but it works well enough to give
most wearers an impression that they are under gravity, which is psychologically useful.
Magnetic Shoes & Boots – $5 to $100+ – BODY 1, mass negligible. The price depends mainly on fashion, in
general work shoes and boots are cheap, fashion shoes can be very expensive, especially if they are aimed at the
wealthy space yachting set. Capabilities for e.g. protection are the same as for any other shoe; for example, work
boots will protect the feet against impact, acid, etc., fashion shoes usually don’t offer any protection at all. Most
space suits incorporate magnetic boots.

Accommodation: Explorers, traders, and other travellers often need housing. While a tent (5lb $20) or a
sleeping bag (3lb $10) may be all that’s needed in some locations, such as the cooler areas of Venus
and most parts of Mars, more care is needed when there are adverse conditions, as in the Venus
Hotlands, the frozen wastes of Titan, etc.
Prefabricated shelters are generally made of aluminium alloys, due to their lightness, but there are
disadvantages; strong chemicals and impacts can damage or destroy them, and they are easily damaged
by weapons and other attacks. Where possible stronger materials are preferred; on Io native woods are
used to build log cabins, on Ganymede concrete domes based on native technology are used by many
traders, the main cities of Titan are dug into the rock, the pirate Red Peri used a cave lair, and so
forth.
Venus Hotland Cabin - $750 and up, mass 0.5 tons and up, BODY 5, Armour 2, consists of one or more rooms
with a filtered air supply, air lock, anti-spore spray, basic cooking facilities, a bunk and other furnishings, a
radium power supply, etc. Add $300 and 0.3 tons per additional room. Note that the price is for delivery to
Venus, but does not include transportation to the final location or foundations; if the cabin is undermined by
mud spouts etc. it will probably be lost. Double the price and mass if foundations are needed.
Titan Igloo - $1500 and up, mass 0.4 tons and up, BODY 4, Armour 2, consists of one rooms with an air lock,
basic cooking facilities, radium power supply and heater, a bunk and other furnishings etc. Add $1000 per
additional occupant. Note that the price includes transportation to Titan but not to its final location.

Gadgets and Gizmos
Telescope (hand-held monocular design)
12” Astronomical telescope
35mm camera with fixed standard lens
16mm cine camera
Radium battery
Fluorolux lantern
Hexylamine (Illegal)

10lb, $50
50lb, $200
1lb, $70
15lb, $150

Binoculars with compass and rangefinder
Field microscope for biologist
35mm camera with three lenses
Pilot’s precision chronometric watch

1lb, $25 to 10lb, $200 depending on capacity
5lb, $30 including radium battery
Negligible mass, $1 per dose on Earth, $5-$10 elsewhere.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 94 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

5lb $75
10lb, $200
8lb, $250
4oz, $150

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Load Up on Guns (Friends Optional)

Inferno burst. The tiny diamond, giving up all its energy in one terrific blast, shot a jagged stream of fire that
filled the canyon from wall to wall and vomited out beyond to cut a fan of fire through the bleeding-grass of
the slope.
The Mad Moon

Load Up on Guns (Friends Optional)

S

PACE is big and the natives aren’t always friendly. There are times when a man
(or woman, or Martian) has to do what a man (or woman, or Martian)
has to do, and it pays to have the best possible weapon for the job.

The most reliable hand weapons available are still old-style automatic
pistols and rifles. The most powerful (but decidedly unreliable) are
flame guns, which initiate a partial carbon-cycle fusion reaction in an
industrial diamond, converting some of its matter into energy and
discharging a huge gout of super-hot plasma flame.
There are larger military versions of both of these weapons, as well as more
specialised weapons such as blasters (nuclear grenades), special ammunition
for use aboard ships, Boland explosive bullets, etc.

Mauser concept
model for an
“improved” flame
pistol, 2095. The
prototype exploded
and the project was
abandoned.

Leroy wanted to dissect it with a Boland explosive bullet, but I thought that anything that had lived for ten
million years was entitled to the respect due to old age, so I talked him out of it.
Valley of Dreams
.45 AUTOMATIC ($75-$125)
Huge handgun; 2 shots/rd, 8 shots per clip
Normal ammo; Effect 9, A:I, B:I, C:C/K ($3 per 100)
Boland bullets; Effect 7 plus explosion, burst radius 4ft, Effect 12, A: F, B:I, C:C/K ($1 per 10)
Fragmentation bullets: Effect 6, A:F, B:I, C:C/K – will not penetrate spaceship hulls ($4 per 100)
.38 AUTOMATIC ($60-$100)
Large handgun; 2 shots/rd, 10 shots per clip.
Normal ammo; Effect 7, A:I, B:I, C:C/K ($2.50 per 100)
Boland bullets; Effect 5 plus explosion, burst radius 4ft, Effect 8, A: F, B:I, C:C/K ($1 per 10)
Fragmentation bullets: Effect 5, A:F, B:I, C:C/K– will not penetrate spaceship hulls ($3.50 per 100)
.357 RIFLE ($125-$200)
Large rifle; 1 shot/rd, 5 shots per clip.
Normal ammo; Effect 10, A:I, B:I, C:C/K ($4 per 100)
Boland bullets; Effect 9 plus explosion, burst radius 4ft, Effect 12, A: F, B:I, C:C/K ($4 per 10)
40MM MACHINE CANNON ($450 / $750 WITH FITTINGS FOR SPACECRAFT USE)
Tripod or vehicle-mounted belt-fed machine gun; 5 shots/rd, multiple targets at -2, 400 shots per
belt. Single shots may be fired.
Normal ammo; Effect 10, A:I, B:I, C:C/K ($25 / belt 400)
Boland bullets; Effect 9 plus explosion, burst radius 6ft, Effect 14, A:F, B:I, C:C/K ($100 / belt 400)
Spaceship-mounted versions incorporate an airlock so that air doesn’t leak out of the barrel.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 95 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Load Up on Guns (Friends Optional)

“…that crystal weapon of Tweel’s was an interesting device… It fired a little glass splinter, poisoned, I suppose,
and I guess it held at least a hundred of ‘em to a load. The propellant was steam – just plain steam!... …You
could see the water through the transparent handle and about a gill of another liquid, thick and yellowish. When
Tweel squeezed the handle – there was no trigger – a drop of water and a drop of the yellow stuff squirted into
the firing chamber, and the water vaporized – like that…
A Martian Odyssey
MARTIAN PISTOL ($1000 AND UP)
Small handgun; 1 shot/rd, 128 shots.
Dart; Effect 4, A:F, B:I, C:C/K*
*Ammunition is coated with a chemical harmful to Martian life,
adding Effect 4+1/round, but harmless to humans.
The gun must be hand-reloaded with darts and chemical
A convincing forgery
propellant once the ammunition is exhausted, which takes several
of a Martian pistol
minutes.
Scotland Yard, 2065
These weapons are mostly used by Martians, but there are a few
in human hands; they sell at high prices as collector’s items, not working weapons, and there is a brisk
trade in fakes. Ammunition is virtually unobtainable off Mars. The grip is sized for Martian hands, not
human, and they are difficult for humans to use, -1 to Marksmanship skill at all ranges. One of the
most common errors in forgeries is sizing the grip closer to the shape and size of a human hand.
And as for the flame pistol, that was like using a Big Bertha to swat a fly. Its vast belch of fire would certainly
incinerate all the slinkers in its immediate path, along with grass, trees, and loonies, but that again would make
but little impress on the surviving hordes, and it meant laboriously recharging the pistol with another black
diamond and another barrel.
The Mad Moon
FLAME PISTOL ($150-$200)
Heat Ray; Range 300ft radius 20ft, Effect 30 A:I, B:C/K, C:K
Fires 1 shot per 3 rounds; Ammunition industrial diamonds, value $10
Barrel (cost $5) shatters on 10-11; changing barrels takes 40 minutes.
Ruger Vulcan 2093
Chamber bursts on 12 – not repairable.
Use in confined spaces is not recommended!
Illegal in most “civilised” areas, cities, etc.
Flame pistols use powerful electromagnets (in
the barrel) and a small radium source (in the chamber) to compress a diamond,
ignite a momentary carbon-fusion reaction, and contain the resultant explosion so
that the energy leaves via the end of the barrel rather than detonating the entire gun.
They’re designed to fail “safe”; by the time the barrel can split the reaction is almost always
over, so that the barrel is destroyed but the marksman and the rest of the gun remain
unscathed. Occasionally the reaction flashes back down the barrel to the radium chamber; the
whole gun can be destroyed, although this again usually happens after the shot has been fired.
Hand-held flame pistols are a moderately successful kludge, a spin-off of the military flame cannon
(below); to make them light enough to carry most of the safety mechanisms of the flame cannon are
omitted, hence the increased risk of barrel bursts etc. One consequence is that swapping the barrel is
very slow; about 40 minutes, compared to a few seconds for the military model, which has an
elaborate system of motorised clamps and contacts to align the barrel and connect it.
There are several models, with identical statistics; barrels cannot be swapped between models.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 96 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Load Up on Guns (Friends Optional)

FLAME CANNON ($1700 / $3000 WITH FITTINGS FOR SPACECRAFT USE)
Heat Ray; Range 300ft radius 20ft, Effect 30 A:I, B:C/K, C:K
Fires 1 shot per 2 rounds; ammunition industrial diamonds value $10
Barrel (cost $12) shatters on 11; since the barrels are changed after each shot this does not delay the
next shot. Chamber bursts on 12 – not repairable.
The military version of the flame pistol is the flame cannon, a belt fed weapon. Each belt segment
contains a pre-loaded barrel (inside an airtight outer barrel casing in the ship-mounted version). As the
barrel is brought up to the gun an automatic clamping system fixes it in place and connects the barrel
electromagnets. The cycle from one shot to the next takes two rounds, but these weapons are often
mounted in pairs so that one shot can be fired every round. After the belt (typically 30 barrels) has
been used each barrel must be laboriously reloaded with a new diamond. If a barrel shatters it must be
removed from the belt and replaced during reloading – this takes about 10 minutes. If the chamber
bursts the gun is not repairable. This is by any standard a clumsy weapon, weighing about 300lb.
Spaceship-mounted versions are designed so that the barrel aperture automatically seals shut as the
barrels are changed and if the chamber bursts, to avoid depressurising the ship. It is not believed that
this mechanism has ever operated prematurely, causing the entire gun to explode inside the ship.
There are several models, with identical statistics; barrels cannot be swapped between models.
Note: This weapon is not canon for the setting, but its existence as the source and more reliable version of
the flame gun seems a plausible way to account for the limitations of the hand-held version.
…It seemed to me that the whole mountain lifted. Vast masses of crumbling rock hurtled toward the black sky.
Bits of stone, whistling like bullets and incandescent like meteors, shot past us, and the very ground we clung to
heaved like the deck of a rolling rocket.
Redemption Cairn
BLASTER ($250 FOR LEGAL PURCHASER, MUCH MORE ON BLACK MARKET)
Explosion; Radius 30ft, Effect 25+2D6, A:I, B:C/K, C:K
Blasters are atomic grenades equivalent to a few tons of conventional explosives, consisting of a
radium source and a chamber full of iron salts. When the pin is pulled a lead shutter opens and the salt
is irradiated and converted to energy. This continues until the casing is shattered, releasing the blast.
They can be thrown, but not far enough to avoid injury under Earth gravity, or used with a timer.
The reaction typically takes 2-3 rounds, during which a faint whistling can be heard, superheated
gas leaking out of the pin aperture. At the end of this time the grenade explodes. It’s just possible to
put the pin back in and close the shutter, but anyone attempting this is likely to be badly burned since
the casing heats to several hundred degrees before it bursts. Availability is theoretically limited to the
military services and licensed demolition contractors, but they can be found on the black market.
STUNNER ($350)
Sonic pulse; Radius 3ft, Maximum Range 20ft, Effect 8, A:B, B:KO+B, C:KO/KO+I
This weapon uses modulated sound to “overload” the
target’s nervous system and cause unconsciousness. It is
useless in a vacuum, but devastating in the confined corridors
of a spaceship. There is a slight risk of injury; stun guns can
cause concussion (or epileptic fits at the discretion of the
referee). The standard designs are only effective against
humans. A radium battery gives hundreds of shots.
Note: This weapon is not canon for the setting but seems plausible given the other
technology described.
Colt Pacifier Stun Gun, 2100

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 97 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Love and Rockets

… Suddenly he pulled her into his arms. “I’m not going to quarrel about whose fault it was,” he said. “But we’ll
settle one thing immediately. We’re going to Erotia, and that’s where we’ll be married, in a good American
church if they’ve put one up yet, or by a good American justice if they haven’t. There’s no more talk of
Madman’s Pass and crossing the Mountains of Eternity. Is that clear?”
Parasite Planet

Love and Rockets

R

OMANCE seems to bloom easily in
space. This may in part be the result
of the scarcity of single women;
relatively few venture into space, about one
for every twenty single men, and those who
do often find that they experience a surfeit
of admirers. This isn’t surprising, of course,
but it occurs so often that it has become a
cliché of romantic fiction.

The Eugenics Institute of Chicago’s 2093 study1 suggested that there is a measurable increase
in intelligence in the children of off-world colonists, attributed to selection by the parents
(especially the mothers) of second-generation colonists. It argues that women venture into space
because they subconsciously seek intelligent husbands. Most other studies suggest a much simpler
causal relationship; everyone going into space is to some extent selected for intelligence by (for
example) passing tests to qualify as space crew, nurses, etc., and in many cases by surviving on
colony worlds where those of lower intelligence would be more likely to die for one reason or
another. For example, about 10% of “new chums” on Venus die in their first year, usually as a
result of forgetting one or another step in keeping themselves fungus-free in the Hotlands. The
survivors are likely to be of slightly higher intelligence, or at least more capable of following the
appropriate instructions, than those who die.
Whether or not there is any true link between marriage and intelligence, it’s estimated that about 65%
of single women who take up space-faring careers marry within five years, and that more often than not
their husbands are colonists, miners, space-crew, or others whose career takes them into space.
Even the most cursory examination of the current crop of romantic literature suggests a few common
themes and character stereotypes that crop up again and again, to such an extent that the same author
may reuse them several times.
For example, in dozens of novels, stories, and video dramas the hero (often in fact an anti-hero who
gradually becomes heroic as love blooms) is a trader, trapper, or other loner who rescues a beautiful
heiress from certain doom in e.g. the swamps of Venus, the jungles of Io, etc., reluctantly agrees to help
her return to civilisation, and gradually falls in love with her as the journey progresses. In such stories the
gradual flowering of love is generally contrasted with the brutality of nature. Exploration is another
popular theme, of course, with romance flowering as the characters explore strange new worlds, meet
new life and new civilisations, and all too often end up destroying large swathes of both with flame guns,
blasters, and other weapons.

1

Intelligence-Biased Selective Breeding on Venus, Io and Ganymede; K.R. Thwaite and D.D. Buskin, EIC Press 2086
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 98 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Love and Rockets

A full list of the plots and tropes found in these novels would be wearisome; a few more examples will
suffice:
Woke Up on Venus
The Hero and Heroine wake to discover that they have somehow been transported to an isolated area of
another world (typically the Venusian Hotlands, sometimes the ice mountains of Titan or the jungles of
Io), with no memory of having met before or travelled there, then learn that in the “lost” days they have
apparently married, aboard ship or in a frontier town.
According to the needs of the story this may be the result of too much booze, a fiendish plot of some
sort (likely if one or both are rich), or an unusual colonisation scheme. Naturally true love eventually
triumphs, even if it is learned that one or another of the characters was in on the plot from the start.
The Pirate Queen
The original version of this hoary plot (which dates back to the days
of sail and possibly even rowing galleys) has a rich bored heroine
abducted by a particularly gallant pirate captain, and held under
reasonably comfortable conditions pending her ransom. Needless to
say his behaviour is impeccably correct, although she is completely
at his mercy, and he actually protects him from less respectful
underlings.
Gradually her hatred of him turns to love as she realises that her
life is much more interesting since her abduction, she eventually
confesses her love to him. Their romance continues until the
ransom is paid and they are forced to part. But her old life no
longer has any appeal to the heiress, and eventually she “escapes”
and finds her way back to the pirates, and to a resumption of their
interrupted affair.
As soon as it was known that the pirate Red Peri was a woman, it
was inevitable that the older pirate trope would have competition.
The most popular current versions “borrow” liberally from the tales
of this enigmatic figure, attributing her motives to love or a broken
heart. Unusually for romantic fiction, the viewpoint character is Privateers of Pluto (RKO 2094).
often male, a captive who admires the pirate queen even as he The hero pledges allegiance to the pirate
seeks to escape or capture her. For legal reasons the real Red Peri’s queen, knowing that he must betray her.
alleged motivations are rarely mentioned in fiction; the Queen’s
behaviour is generally attributed to revenge for abuse, infidelity, or other crimes against the Queen or her
family.
Crewman “Bob” – Adapted from a suggestion by Mavis Cruet
The bluff no-nonsense hard-hitting Captain of a freighter cares for no-one… until he slowly starts to
recognise an odd trickle of affection for one of the new crewmen appointed by the shipping line; new
crewmen who otherwise seem to take their orders from the company, not the Captain, and seem to have
their own agenda which may have more to do with profit margins and inflated insurance values than the
safety of the ship.
When the Captain confides in the only “man” he thinks he can trust, he learns that “he” is in fact a
woman, whose father was the captain of another ship owned by the company, now lost in the deeps of
space. Together they must work to overcome the company; inevitably, as they do so, they fall in love.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 99 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Love and Rockets

The Princess Bribe
A Russian Princess (in some stories she’s British or from one of the smaller states that still has royalty)
decides that she has had enough of the decadence of Earth and wishes to experience the adventurous life
as a pioneer. The hero is hired to make life unpleasant for her, but harmlessly so, with the goal of
persuading her to return to Earth and resume her royal duties. Of course things aren’t that easy,
especially when love blooms, and eventually both are on the run from Imperial agents who want to return
the Princess to the Motherland, and get rid of the hero permanently.
The Venusian Queen – Adapted from a suggestion by John Reiher
In the swamps of Venus, a missionary and his beautiful daughter are ministering to the “heathen savages.”
But armed conflict has broken out between two of the largest tribes and their mission is in the middle of
it. The hero and his friends run a swamp boat which normally delivers supplies to traders and other
humans in the area; as the war escalates they’re asked to evacuate civilians from the area. But naturally
the headstrong girl has other ideas...
Mighty Joe Yurgguh – Adapted from a suggestion by John Reiher
A young girl colonist on Mars wants a pet, and is given a small animal by some Martian friends, but
doesn’t quite understand what they tell her about its habits etc. Inevitably it grows into a massively large
and surprisingly intelligent creature that is nevertheless gentle under the ministrations of the young
woman. A handsome entrepreneur convinces her to bring Joe back to the earth to star in a night club
act, but Joe becomes bored then jealous as love blossoms between girl and entrepreneur. Problems ensue
when Joe decides that it wants to go back to Mars, and isn’t willing to take ‘no’ for an answer or return
alone.
On Location
Since many readers of romantic novels are also movie fans, it isn’t surprising that stories with a movie
industry background are popular. In such novels the heroine is either a famous actress or (depending on
the target audience) her secretary / costume designer / makeup artist, with a glamorous cast of actors,
directors, etc. vying for her affections en route to film on Mars, Venus, or one of the moons of Jupiter.
Sometimes that’s all that there is to the plot, and the story ends with the heroine and her newfound love
continuing to work in the industry – a common variant has the heroine as the understudy to an actress
who succumbs to some alien disease during the voyage, with the understudy going on to become a star –
but usually the heroine finds love with a rugged spaceman, miner, explorer, etc., and the story ends with
her leaving the profession to become a pioneer.
…Together They Fight Aliens
Inspired largely by the careers of famous explorers Ham and Patricia Hammond, and possibly by earlier
sources such as the “Thin Man” movies of the 20th century, this variant on the traditional “oddly
mismatched couple / opposites attract” love story is a romantic comedy in which the hero and heroine
are already married but have contrasting personalities and constantly bicker. Usually their arguments
disguise their love. In many examples the couple are forced to pretend that they are not married so that
one can (for example) infiltrate a pirate operation, a hexylamine smuggling gang, etc. while the other
pretends to be unattached and runs into romantic complications. Often the plot throws in
misunderstandings such as apparently compromising situations which may briefly lead to estrangement,
but this particular plot variant never leads to divorce; instead all problems are eventually resolved, and the
natural status quo of the marriage is restored. Often such restoration occurs over the bodies of a few
dozen pirates or several hundred aliens, but that’s romance…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 100 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Love and Rockets

Running Romantic Adventures
Forgotten Futures already includes suggestions on melodramatic role playing (in Forgotten Futures VI and
as the Adding Melodrama appendix of the most recent versions of the rules) which involve running
characters as though they are members of a troupe of actors, with asides to the audience, songs,
soliloquies, etc. These rules are readily adapted to romance and to romantic comedy, by toning down the
melodrama a little and concentrating more on the emotional side of things. It should be remembered that
Weinbaum’s heroines are far more self-reliant than those of Victorian melodrama.
The secret of success in this type of adventure is not to overdo the romance; there needs to be a
substantial plot too, and one that gives everyone something to do. One of the adventures includes predefined characters with some romantic possibilities, but the adventure revolves around an unexplained
death that may be a murder mystery.
It’s notable that there are actually very few Villains in Weinbaum’s Planetary stories – in most of them
nature and alien life forms are the enemy:
Peri Maclane (The Red Peri) is an Anti-Heroine rather than a true Villain, and most of her pirate gang
are devoted to her, rather than being Villains in their own right. The nearest thing to a large villainous
organisation in her story is the Interplanetary Corporation, which seems to be prepared to go to almost
any lengths to protect its near-monopoly on space flight and spaceship technology.
Kratska (Redemption Cairn) is an out and out villain with no redeeming features – he’s a hexylamine
addict and probably an agent for Interplanetary, though this is never stated explicitly. He commits
multiple murders, he’s cruel to animals, tries to abduct the heroine, and appears to be a Master of
Disguise. Naturally he comes to a sticky end.
Kirt Scaler (Tidal Moon) is an Antihero rather than a true Villain. Admittedly he tries to steal the
Hero’s girl and commit industrial espionage, but nobody really gets hurt. It’s easy to imagine the Hero
and Scaler meeting in a bar on Io a few years down the line and settling their differences amicably.
Most of the melodramatic Traits included in the rules are suitable for use in this setting. It’s pointless
to list all of them here, but some particularly useful examples follow:
Amnesiac: see Woke Up on Venus, above.
Disguised nobility: Members of noble and royal families are often discouraged from working in space, and
may be forced to resort to disguises to escape their family obligations.
Doomed: An interesting way to bring the Romantic Interest into the plot. There may be a cure, but it
requires exposure to a Mound-Builder crystal, exotic plants only found in the Jungles of Io or the
Hotlands of Venus, etc. etc.
Extraordinary wealth: Essential for anyone who owns a spaceship without crippling financial problems,
may also be true of occasional miners, traders, etc.
Femme Fatale: Very common, especially amongst female pirates and other aggressive female leads.
Foreign: All aliens count as “foreign,” albeit definitely not romantic interest for humans.
Heiress: Lost / shipwrecked / marooned / disguised heiresses are a staple of the genre.
Insane: Uncommon in this era, but several diseases on alien worlds can cause delirium or insanity, as can
drugs such as Hex. Then there’s mind control from dream-beasts and the intelligent plants of the
Venusian dark-side. Fortunately most of these conditions are short-lived, but they’re ample reason for
a character to be insane for the duration of an adventure.
Loner: Common amongst prospectors, traders, etc.
Mortgage: Anyone who owns a ship and isn’t ridiculously rich probably has money problems, which may
eventually amount to a crushing burden, especially if unscrupulous creditors demand prompt
repayment or other favours.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 101 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Love and Rockets

Master of Disguise: Common amongst incognito pirates etc., or famous explorers seeking a little peace
and quiet.
Long Lost Heir: Several early colonial attempts failed, e.g. on Venus – maybe a few children were
rescued from one of them, and nobody now realises that one of them is heir to a vast fortune.
Reborn: Members of an alien race are convinced that one of the adventurers is an important historical
figure reborn, and want him or her to take up the mantle of their predecessor – or want to seek
revenge for the predecessor’s misdeeds!
Secret, Notorious: Common amongst spacemen with a shady past, e.g. they survived a disaster by taking
someone’s oxygen; circumstances may have made other choices impossible, in which case the subject
may suffer pangs of conscience, and it’s a bit embarrassing to be known as “the pilot who ate the chief
engineer’s leg” etc. Important romantic secrets might be “Secretly engaged”, “Divorced”, etc.
Sense of Duty: Very common amongst spaceship officers, especially in military service.
Transvestism: See Crewman “Bob,” above.
Uncanny Powers: Fairly common amongst the more melodramatic villains, but usually as the result of
scientific research; “After years of study I have duplicated the powers of the dream-beasts of Mars.
Look into my eyes and love me…”
Wanted: Very common amongst space pirates, shady colonials, etc. Since piracy carries the death penalty
the phrase may be “Wanted, Dead or Alive.”
Some new Traits especially appropriate to this genre:
Addict: The character (Antihero or Villain) is addicted to Hexylamine or some other drug. The Love of a
Good Woman may help an Antihero shake the habit. Villains are more likely to come to a sticky end.
Bickering: A common trait of married couples. See …Together They Fight Aliens, above.
Girl in Every Port: Most common amongst spacecrew. The Hero (or more commonly an Antihero) has
girlfriends wherever he goes. Naturally they will fall by the wayside when he encounters True Love.
Legally Dead: With flights sometimes taking months, and many possible reasons for delay, ships are
occasionally incorrectly reported as lost. After all hope seems to be gone the crew must be declared
legally dead. This can be a problem, especially if a husband or wife decides to remarry before the
mistake is rectified… The “lost” spouse may be desperate to be reunited with the lost love, or might
prove to be the villain of the story, willing to wreck true romance to resume an unhappy relationship.
Scarlet Woman: A female character, widely known for her promiscuity, at least in her local community.
Maybe this leads to resentment or anger, maybe it’s just accepted as the way things are, especially if
the Scarlet Woman isn’t a threat to marriages; e.g. the only single woman in an isolated mining colony
who is “liberal” with her affections but isn’t interested in married men. For a more romantic plot it’s
possible that the reputation is entirely without foundation, gossip spread by someone who is jealous of
the heroine’s beauty.
Selflessly Devoted: The character loves someone and regards his or her happiness as paramount, even if it
means personal risk. See e.g. Diane Vick (Flight on Titan) who accompanies her husband to the
desolate ice moon at great risk to her own life.
Unfaithful: Most common amongst villains, but occasionally amongst romantic Heroes – with the latter
the plot must involve realisation of the mistake and remorse as the character tries to make things right
with his or her spouse.
Wandering Eyes / Hands: Most common for male characters who have yet to be Redeemed by the Love
of a Good Woman, these traits are exactly what they sound like. If the subject of the trait ever actually
encounters said Good Woman the most likely result is a slapped face, a broken nose (Weinbaum’s
heroines are reasonably good at looking after themselves), or in extreme cases severe damages to
sensitive parts of the anatomy, up to and including bullet wounds.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 102 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

“What the devil!” gulped Keene. He twisted his head within his immovable helmet, peering through the rear
visor glasses. Five—no, six figures in blue metal space suits were ranged behind him; they must have approached
in the inaudibility of a vacuum while he had been scouring his suit free of the crystals. For a moment he had an
eerie sensation of wonder, fearful that he faced some grotesque denizens of the mysterious black planet, but a
glance revealed that the forms were human. So were the faces dim in the dusk behind the visors; so had been
the voice he had heard.
Keene hesitated. “Listen,” he said. “We’re not interfering with you. All we want is some tungsten in order
to fix our—“
“Move!” snapped the voice, whose tones ravelled through the weapon hard against Keene’s back. “And
remember that I’m two thirds inclined to kill you anyway. Now move!”
The Red Peri

Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

T

HIS section contains adventures for this setting and is written primarily for referees;
if you will be playing a character in these scenarios you are advised not to read past
this introduction. Knowledge of things to come won’t give you any advantages; it
just spoils the fun if you know what the referee plans to throw at you.
There are three full-length adventures, plus some short outlines. All were written for three to
six player characters, but in a pinch can probably be run for larger or smaller groups. There are
detailed statistics for six characters below, used by the author for demonstration games.
•

•

•
•

Grand Tour is a framing story for the sample characters; it isn’t a complete adventure in itself, but
provides a rationale for a diverse group of adventurers to be travelling together, and a suitable ship,
and includes seven scenario outlines. With one exception the other adventures can easily be fitted into
this framing story.
In With a Pinch of Salt there are problems with the mobile factory that supplies much of Venus with
the salt that’s essential for its atomic power plants. Fortunately some visiting spacefarers have the skills
and transport needed to get to the factory and resolve the problem.
A Ceres of Unfortunate Events takes the adventurers to the Asteroid Belt, and gives them the
opportunity to explore the interior of the largest asteroid by submarine.
Earth Girls Aren’t Easy visits Titan, where the father of the Heroine has died under mysterious
circumstances. It’s a melodramatic adventure that comes with some appropriately melodramatic
characters.

Before running these adventures you will need to print out maps and other handouts, and may wish to
purchase or build models and other props, such as the ships, factories, submarines etc. that appear in the

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 103 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

adventures – PDF plans scaled for 25mm/28mm figures can be downloaded from the author’s web site.
Additional props might include models, vehicles, etc. It’s worth mentioning here that models sold as
ornaments or toys are usually much cheaper than those sold specifically for gaming purposes.

Miniatures
There are no miniatures specifically designed for this game setting, and many of the SF ranges seem to be
focussed almost exclusively on heavily armoured figures with ridiculously spiky shoulder pads. Figures sold
for “pulp SF” campaigns are a better bet. Most are comparatively expensive and poorly distributed, but
one cheap source is readily available; collectible plastic figures for the Star Wars™ Miniatures game from
Wizards of the Coast. The humans in this range are depicted in costumes that seem to be based on SF
illustrations of the 1930s to 1950s. There are hundreds of designs, all supplied ready-painted. Most
carry weapons, but they aren’t as heavily armed and over-armoured as most of the other SF ranges. While
there are no space-suited figures, several of the designs resemble space suits and can be modified very
easily; for example, by replacing the head with a spherical bead painted to resemble a helmet.
For information on this system see http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=starwars
Wizards of the Coast sell these figures in packs that have been randomised for game use, which usually
contain some “personality” and alien figures that are unsuitable for this setting, but there are many thirdparty vendors selling them on an individual basis, and “common” figures are often very cheap. I
purchased most of those I use from an American vendor, Auggies Games, and can recommend their
service to overseas customers. See http://store02.prostores.com/servlet/auggiesgames/StoreFront
For metal figures I particularly recommend models sold by Ground Zero Games, especially their Station
and Ship Crew range. Their catalogue (and some free war games) can be downloaded from their web site,
http://www.groundzerogames.net – note that their ranges include some figures intended for anime games
and other models aimed at an adult market, which may not be considered safe for work, children, etc.

Sample Characters
Most of these adventures were demonstrated at conventions using the crew and passengers of the
spaceship Endeavour, one of the British-built contributions to the League of Nations fleet. The rationale
for the mission, explained in more detail in the Grand Tour briefing below, is that the League is
experimenting with mixed military/civilian crews and trying to develop automated spaceship controls.
First it’s necessary to study the current systems under operational conditions during a prolonged flight.
The League personnel are Commander Hubert ‘Huntley’ Palmer (Captain), Lieutenant Hiram Jones
(Engineer), and Professor Milton Morton, who is developing the new control systems. The League has
agreed to let famous explorers ‘Ham’ and Patricia Hammond take part in the cruise, since it will be
visiting several sites of interests to science. They are aboard as acting second lieutenants; they are subject
to the chain of command but only for the specific purposes of their duty station – for example, Ham
Hammond is aboard as a pilot, the captain can order a specific course but can’t order him to shave, wear
uniform, etc.
‘Ham’ will be co-pilot for the flight; Patricia is on the ship’s books as science officer and will also act as
physician, although she doesn’t have formal medical qualifications. The last person aboard is Otto Gerber,
a League of Nations diplomat on confidential business.
If fewer than six characters are needed some can be omitted or run as NPCs.
The equipment on board includes spacesuits, Transkin™ oversuits and filter masks, and cold weather
gear for everyone. Several characters are shown as owning weapons; with a couple of exceptions all are
stored in the ship’s arms locker in flight. Most weapons are standard models, as in the rules or above;
details should be added to the information given to players. The locker also contains four .357 rifles, with
ammunition, belonging to the ship, and six blasters (nuclear grenades).

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 104 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Commander [Hubert] ‘Huntley’ Palmer (RNVR, League of Nations Patrol)
BODY 5, MIND 5, SOUL 3
QUOTE: “Hold her steady at eighty percent power…”
ATHLETE (SWIMMING) 6, BABBAGE ENGINE (NAVIGATOR) 6, BRAWLING 6, BUSINESS
(ADMINISTRATION) 6, LINGUIST (GERMAN, HINDI, RUSSIAN) 6 (MARTIAN) 1,
MARKSMAN 6, MECHANIC 6, MELEE WEAPON 7, MILITARY ARMS 7, MORSE CODE 6,
PILOT (SPACESHIP, SUBMARINE) 8, SCIENTIST (ASTRONOMY) 6, STEALTH 3
You’re British and have served with the Royal Navy then the Patrol all of your adult
life. Currently you command Endeavour, and can’t easily think of anything you’d rather
do, although this cruise is unusual. Normally she has a crew of four Patrol officers; this time around the
Patrol is conducting a public relations exercise and you’re carrying one engineer, Hiram Jones, and four
civilians – “Ham” Hammond, an explorer and journalist, and his wife Patricia, a biologist who will act as
the ship’s physician; Professor Milton Morton, a scientist who is trying to develop some sort of robot pilot
for spaceships, and has rigged chart recorders and other instruments all over the ship; and Otto Gerber, a
League diplomat who is meeting officials on the worlds you visit to discuss the illegal drugs trade.
You’re not sure how you will handle any emergencies that come up, but you’ll try to do your best.
Fortunately Jones is tough and competent, well up to coping with most problems, while Ham Hammond
is a pilot and can relieve you at the controls if necessary, and he and his wife are pleasant company.
You’re still making up your mind about Gerber; he seems competent but tends to keep to his cabin, apart
from an occasional poker game, and you have no real information on his mission except that it involves
suppression of the narcotics trade. As for Morton, you’re counting the days until you can get rid of him;
he’s a real nuisance, and his carelessness has already caused a few minor accidents; he seems to have no
idea how to install equipment safely.
While your real name is Hubert, most of your British friends call you ‘Huntley,’ after Huntley & Palmer
biscuits. You’ve long since given up trying to get people to call you by your real name.
.38 automatic, 4 clips fragmentation bullets – kept in your safe
Stun Gun – kept in your cabin

Lieutenant Byron Jones (Engineer)
BODY 5, MIND 6, SOUL 4
QUOTE: “You lost WHAT down the drain?”
ATHLETE (BASEBALL, BASKETBALL) 6, BRAWLING 8, MARKSMAN 7, MECHANIC 8, MELEE
WEAPON 7, MILITARY ARMS 7, MORSE CODE 7, SCIENTIST (ENGINEERING) 8, STEALTH 4
You are a competent American engineer who currently finds himself aboard a Britishbuilt ship trying to cope with a mad scientist and a bunch of civilians who have been
foisted onto the Commander by the Patrol. You get on reasonably well with Commander
Palmer, despite a little initial awkwardness caused by your race; he comes from the British
Empire, of course, where that sort of thing is still important. Now that he’s used to you there don’t seem
to be any problems. As for the civilians, Ham Hammond and his wife are good people, and the German
diplomat keeps out from underfoot; he’s on some sort of law enforcement mission, something to do with
narcotics. But Milton Morton is an idiot, who keeps getting in the way when you’re trying to work. He
has some damn-fool idea that it might be possible to automate piloting and the routine work of
controlling the engines of a ship, and there are weird gizmos all over the ship, recording everything you
and the Commander do as you operate the ship – on the rare occasions that they work.
Your current aim in life is to get through this cruise without throwing Morton out of the air lock, and
fleece him for as much as you can in your “friendly” poker games. Not that you cheat – you’re just a
MUCH better player than he is!
Stun Gun – kept in your cabin
Skeet Gun (Medium pump action shotgun), 50 cartridges – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 105 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Hamilton ‘Ham’ Hammond (American Explorer / Journalist)
BODY 6, MIND 4, SOUL 3
QUOTE: “There I was, hanging over the pit…”
ARTIST (PHOTOJOURNALIST, ZERO GRAVITY CHEF) 6, ATHLETE (RUNNING, CLIMBING) 8,
BRAWLING 8, LINGUIST (GERMAN, FRENCH) 5 (VENUSIAN) 1, MARKSMAN 6, MELEE
WEAPON 7, MORSE CODE 5, PILOT (SPACESHIP) 6, SCIENCE (ENGINEER) 5, STEALTH 5
Born on Earth, you’ve spent your adult life knocking around the Solar System, initially
as a Xixtchil trader on Venus, where you met your wife Patricia, and later began to work
with her as an explorer for the Smithsonian Institute. Your credits include the discovery of
intelligent life on the Dark Side of Venus and the second expedition to Uranus. You think of yourself as a
man of action rather than a scientist, although you have participated in numerous discoveries. You have a
knack for writing popular accounts of your work, with several books and numerous articles to your credit.
You think that Patricia takes too many risks in the field, and tend to be a little over-protective
occasionally. You’ve saved her life several times, which does lend a little weight to this opinion… but she’s
saved your life almost as often.
Currently, following a second honeymoon on Earth, you’re working your passage as co-pilot aboard
the League of Nations Patrol Ship Endeavour; you’re writing a series of articles about the work of the
Patrol for National Geographic, while Patricia studies the plants and animals of the worlds you visit. Of the
others aboard, Commander Palmer seems to be very competent, as does the engineer, Hiram Jones. Otto
Gerber is a diplomat who keeps a little distance from others, but plays a mean game of poker. And
Milton Morton is an obsessive geek who thinks that science is an acceptable substitute for common sense.
Large Knife – worn on belt
Flame Pistol, 4 barrels, 20 rounds – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.
.45 automatic, 4 clips normal ammo, 4 clips Boland explosive bullets. – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.

Patricia Hammond (nee Burlingame; Venus-born Biologist / Explorer)
BODY 4, MIND 5, SOUL 4
QUOTE: “It could be some sort of bryophyte…”
ATHLETE (RUNNING) 5, BRAWLING 6, FIRST AID 7, LINGUIST (FRENCH, DUTCH) 7
(VENUSIAN) 2, MARKSMAN 7, MELEE WEAPON 5, SCIENCE (BOTANIST) 7, STEALTH 4
The first child born on Venus, you met and fell in love with “Ham” Hammond at the
end of the 21st century, and have been married to him for fifteen years. You are a
passionate botanist, ready to take almost any risk in the service of Science. Ham tends to
be over-protective, although you have to admit that you’ve occasionally given him cause
for worry. You’ve saved his life as often as he’s saved yours, so he has no real reason to complain!
Your credits as explorers include the discovery of intelligent life on the Dark Side of Venus and several
plant and animal species on the second expedition to Uranus. You’re interested in the (widely accepted)
theory that Martian explorers spread several species around the solar system circa 13000 BC, and hope
to find more proof. Following a second honeymoon on Earth you’re both signed on to the League of
Nations Patrol Ship Endeavour; you’re studying the biology of the worlds you visit, while Ham working as
co-pilot and writing a series of articles about the work of the Patrol for National Geographic. Of the others
aboard, Commander Palmer seems competent but you have a feeling that he’d be happier with a normal
crew. You get the same feeling from the engineer, Hiram Jones. Otto Gerber seems pleasant enough but
very reserved about his work. And Milton Morton is an obsessive tinkerer, an accident waiting to happen.
Flame Pistol, 5 barrels, 15 rounds – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.
.38 automatic, 4 clips normal bullets – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.
Net Gun, 10 rounds, propels a 20ft diameter net, Body 4, Effect 6, up to 50ft.– kept in your cabin.
Biology field kit – portable microscope, specimen tubes etc. Laboratory equipment in cabin.
First aid kit

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 106 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Professor Milton Morton (eccentric scientist)
BODY 3, MIND 6, SOUL 2
QUOTE: “They all laughed at me at MIT…”
BABBAGE ENGINE (ROBOTICS) 7, BRAWLING 3, MARKSMAN 5, MECHANIC 8, MELEE
WEAPON 4, SCIENTIST (ROBOTICS, ATOMIC PHYSICS) 8, STEALTH 2
A misunderstood genius, you aim to design robotic control equipment that will do the
routine work of space travel; it’s ludicrous that ships need constant course corrections and
“tweaking” by the pilots and engineer. There must be a better way. You have persuaded
the Patrol to let you monitor this cruise, analyze all operations, and use the results to
create a suite of automated controls.
You’re making progress, but people seem to be going out of their way to complain. Of course your
equipment is bulky! Of course there are a few cables! Only fools would trip over them as often as they
do. You’ve complained to Palmer, but he doesn’t seem to be interested in the advancement of science.
As for Jones, the so-called engineer, you suspect that he’s sabotaging your experiments, though you’ve
yet to catch him in the act. Of the others aboard, Hammond seems to side with Jones and Palmer, while
his wife has no real understanding of science – admittedly she’s a botanist, but you don’t consider that to
be a real science – and Gerber is a mystery; you have no idea what he thinks of your project. The main
contact you’ve had with him is at the poker table – it’s a stupid game, too dependent on chance, but
everyone seems to expect you to play. So far you’ve lost $212, mostly to Jones and Gerber.
Electromagnetic gun: Large handgun; 1 shot/rd (or burst of all remaining ammunition), 20 shots
Effect 9, A:I, B:I, C:C/K
You’ve invented an electromagnetic rail gun firing steel darts, single shots or a burst which empties the
magazine in an instant; you’re still working on that. You haven’t told anyone that it’s a weapon; it
looks more like a test instrument. It isn’t rated as safe for use aboard ship.

Doctor Otto Gerber (League of Nations diplomat and lawyer)
BODY 5, MIND 6, SOUL 3
QUOTE: “You might think that, but I couldn’t comment…”
ACTOR (ORATORY) 7, ATHLETE (GOLF, SWIMMING) 6, BRAWLING 6, LINGUIST (ENGLISH,
GERMAN, ITALIAN, CANTONESE) 8 (MARTIAN) 1, MARKSMAN 9, MELEE WEAPON (SWORD)
7, PILOT (GYRO & LIGHT AIRCRAFT) 6, SCHOLAR (LAW, GOVERNMENT, ETC.) 8, STEALTH 3
A hard-working bureaucrat currently assigned to the League of Nations Economic
Committee. The Committee plans anti-trust moves against the giant Interplanetary Corporation, the
largest space line. You are gathering evidence on the line’s activities in space and on the colony worlds.
This involves talks with colonial administrators and law enforcement officials, and must be done very
quietly, since Interplanetary are ruthless. To avoid attracting their attention you are travelling aboard the
Endeavour, a League patrol ship. To cover your activities you are supposed to be discussing extradition,
piracy and the narcotics problem; several off-world plants have narcotic effects, and small quantities have
begun to appear on the black market on Earth. It’s trivial compared to “traditional” drugs such as cocaine
and heroin and modern synthetics, but enough of a problem to be convincing.
As part of your cover the ship is carrying three other civilians; “Ham” and Patricia Hammond, the
well-known explorers, and Milton Morton, a scientist who thinks that it may be possible to automate
space ships but seems to be a bit of a fool. You haven’t told them about your mission or its cover; as far
as they’re concerned you’re travelling for “talks with local law enforcement organizations” without
additional details. Commander Palmer and Lieutenant Jones have been given the narcotics cover story.
While you won’t go out of your way to hurt anyone, you are prepared for trouble; Interplanetary has
fingers in a lot of pies, and its directors must suspect that the League may be planning moves against it.
.32 automatic, 2 clips bullets (standard ammunition) – kept in ship’s arm’s locker.
Sword stick – kept in cabin or carried.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 107 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

All the News That’s
Fit to Print

The New York Times

Endeavour loading supplies during yesterday afternoon’s snowstorm.

Spaceship Automation Anger
as HMSS Endeavour Departs
for Venus and Outer Planets.
By Tanya Clarke
HMSS Endeavour, one of the British spaceships
assigned to the League of Nations Patrol, will lift
from Young’s Field, Long Island, at 3.35 A.M.
tomorrow, bound for Venoble, Venus.
The flight is the first leg of a multi-planet
expedition, whose aims include scientific research,
tests on methods of automating spaceship power
and control systems, piracy suppression, etc. The
launch should be visible from most parts of the
New York Metropolitan area and New Jersey.
The captain of the ship,
Commander Hubert Palmer,
stated that the night launch
was essential to conserve fuel:
‘We’re heavily loaded, and
Venus isn’t in the best position
for a direct flight. Launching
then gives us an extra boost
from the Moon’s gravity. From
Venus onward we’ll be well
positioned to save on fuel and Commander Palmer
supplies in later stages.’
Lieutenant Hiram Jones, a native of this city
and Endeavour’s chief engineer, said ‘We’re looking
forward to takeoff, and to getting to know each
other en route. I’ve already briefly met the
scientific team and Professor Morton, the engineer
who is working on the control systems, and I expect
this to be a memorable flight.’

Late City Edition
Closing Stock Prices

Two key crew positions will be taken by
civilian scientists; Hamilton ‘Ham’ Hammond, the
noted explorer and journalist, will be co-pilot, and
is covering the flight for National Geographic; his
wife, noted botanist Patricia Hammond (nee
Burlingame), famed as the first woman born on
Venus and as the discoverer of many new species
on Venus and Uranus, will be the expedition’s
science officer and physician. Both said that they
were looking forward to the flight, and to
returning to Venus where they first met.
Doctor Otto Gerber, the League attorney and
prosecutor who recently secured the conviction of
the space pirate Alfredo Sanchez, is accompanying
the mission as supernumerary, and for ‘talks with
local law enforcement organizations on subjects of
mutual interest;’ improved co-operation on
tracking fugitives, the trade in illegal drugs,
piracy, etc.
The Space Pilot’s Association and the Union of
Spaceship Engineers have again expressed concern
about attempts to develop automated control
systems. Donald Cunigghiuni, representing the
SPA/USE Local 32, said ‘This is the sort of crazy
stunt that management keeps pulling. Ships are
already flying undermanned; there should be more
pilots and engineers, not less. In the last five years
three crashes have been caused by pilot
exhaustion, if they try to put (deleted) machines
in the cockpit it’ll just get worst. The League must
be nuts to have anything to do with it, they should
know better.’
Interviewed at his hotel, Professor Milton
Morton, the engineer who is developing the new
control systems, stated ‘The purpose of these
experiments is to help pilots and engineers, not
replace them. There will still be a role for them,
especially during takeoffs and landings. The aim
of this project is to relieve them of some of the
pressure that drives so many to early retirement.’
He declined to comment on the union reaction.
The New York Spaceport Authority has stated
that ships will not be allowed to takeoff and land
under automatic control until the system is proven
to be ‘110% reliable.’
New York Times, January 2115

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 108 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Neptune

Venus
Jupiter

Uranus

Earth
Saturn

Mercury

Pluto

Mars

The Solar System
January 2115
The diagrams show the Solar System at the beginning of January 2115. Planets orbit counter-clockwise.
See page 45 for positions of the major asteroids at this time; all are on the opposite side of the Sun to Jupiter.

Grand Tour

T

HIS isn’t a complete adventure; it’s a framing narrative that puts a group of
characters aboard a League patrol ship, with reasons to visit a variety of worlds,
and sets up several possible sources of conflict and adventure seeds.

For convenience only one ship and set of characters is considered; HMSS Endeavour and the pregenerated characters above. There’s nothing to stop referees from using the basic idea with a
different ship and/or set of characters; for example, one of the freighters described at the end of
the spaceship design section. Any of the mission components can be varied to suit the ship or
group of adventurers.
Endeavour’s mission is mostly as described in the newspaper article. There are several goals for any
Patrol cruise:
1. Keep the Peace. The League and the Patrol exist primarily to prevent war. This might mean, for
example, intervening in a dispute between two colonies, between colonists and natives, etc. Any
suspicion of preparations for war must be investigated and if possible dealt with.
2. Carry out the secondary duties of the Patrol; piracy suppression, rescue, etc.
3. Visit the colonies en route, carrying urgent deliveries such as medical supplies that can’t wait for
slow freighters, or any special equipment needed for Endeavour’s on-planet missions. If there’s
cargo capacity to spare, and no other ships are going the right way, League ships may also carry
personal mail, small items of cargo, etc. However, it’s League policy not to compete with civilian
carriers for anything other than the most urgent goods.
4. “Show the flag.” Remind the colonials that the League exists and is a force to be reckoned with,
and keep its image as positive as possible. This might involve clearing some ground with the ship’s

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 109 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

flame cannon, helping local law enforcement catch a fugitive, or even throwing a children’s party
at an isolated outpost’s school. The phrase “Can we help?” should become second nature.
5. Keep the colonies updated on the news from Earth. Interplanetary radio is too slow for much
more than headlines, so most League ships carry packs containing a few months of the major
newspapers, periodicals, and books on microfilm, plus music recordings and 8mm versions of the
latest movies, for delivery to libraries. It’s a free service sponsored by the League, aimed at
keeping the colonies in touch with Earth’s culture.
Additionally, this flight has several unusual features:
6. Doctor Gerber’s mission is expected to take several days at each colony visited. He’s mostly factfinding, collecting information about the activities of the Interplanetary Corporation. This is
supposed to be a closely guarded secret, discussed only by Gerber and various law enforcement
agencies, but the cover story (that he is discussing piracy and the drugs trade) has already leaked.
7. Professor Morton’s experiments will eventually lead to some practical tests. Sooner or later he’s
probably going to want to put some of his ideas into practice and automate some of the ship’s
controls. How well he succeeds is left to the discretion of the referee. Engineering work is usually
a lot easier under gravity, so this might call for a few days on the ground.
8. ‘Ham’ and Patricia Hammond have been promised time for Patricia’s scientific work, for ‘Ham’ to
meet colonists and natives, and take in local colour for his articles, etc. Because of this, and
because of Gerber’s mission, there are a few days of slack time between the stages of the flight,
over and above the time needed to refuel, re-supply, and take normal shore leave.
While the newspaper story gives the first port of call as Venus, there’s no need to start with an adventure
set there – just tell the players that the first landing was uneventful, and they’re now going somewhere
else! You can always return there later.
Don’t worry too much about distances, the position of planets, etc., unless your players seem to want
to give a lot of thought to planning every stage. Endeavour has the range, life support, etc. to go
anywhere in the Inner Solar System, even when planets are at opposition, it just takes longer. Journeys to
the Asteroids and the Outer System need more thought, of course.

HMSS Endeavour
Commissioned by the British Government, Endeavour is one of the ships used by the League of Nations
Patrol. The legalities are complex; essentially the Patrol hires the ship and its captain from the British
government for an annual payment of a guinea (about three dollars). Britain pays all operating expenses,
but with two important exceptions has no say in her operation, except by voting in the League’s
Parliament. The exceptions are firstly that she must be commanded by a British or Commonwealth
national, and secondly that she will not be used in operations against the British Commonwealth or its
colonies. There are similar leasing arrangements for ships built by the Russian Empire, America, etc.
Fully fuelled, Endeavour has only ten tons of cargo space, but more capacity can be added at the
expense of range, by taking on a partial fuel load, e.g.
200 tons fuel, 40 days at cruising power, 10 tons cargo
150 tons fuel, 30 days at cruising power, 60 tons cargo
100 tons fuel, 20 days, 110 tons cargo
etc.
There isn’t actually much physical room for a lot of extra cargo, but the extra capacity can be useful if
(for example) a heavy but compact machine has to be transported to Mars.
Endeavour has radium blasts, which means that her normal fuel is pulverised iron or copper ore. If
necessary she can run on salt instead, but salt is less dense than iron ore and takes up more room – her
tanks only have room for about eighty tons, enough for sixteen days cruising.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 110 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Endeavour: One of the British ships assigned to the League of Nations Patrol, primarily a police craft but used for
exploration, diplomacy, etc. Capable of Earth-Jupiter, Jupiter-Saturn, etc.
301.27 tons, $1,352,641
6 cramped accommodation, life support and supplies for 5 weeks, 1 head, small galley, life support supply cost
$750 per flight. 10 tons cargo.
Two pilots, long-range radio, meteor warning / electric plumb, air lock, 1 spacesuit recharge point
Radium engine, horizontal landing on underjets, cruise 0.03g, emergency power 3g, 200 tons fuel (40 days at
cruising power).
Engine maintenance cost $6,243 P/A
4 machine guns (fixed mount firing forward), 2 turret-mounted flame guns (forward arc)
BODY 23, Hull armour 3, Cramped, Lively, -2 Difficulty Pilot skill rolls, +1 Difficulty Engineering-related skill rolls.

A: Control room; pilots, engineering console, chart table
D: Airlock
E: Spacesuit recharge bay
G: Fuel tanks over hold (also under deck below hold)
J: Nacelles containing underjets, steering blasts, landing gear

B: Head (WC, shower, etc.)
F: Cabins (double bunks)
H: Hold (catwalk over cargo etc.)

C: Galley

K: Flame cannon turret
O: Recycling equipment etc.

M: Water ballast / reserve

N: Underjets

L: Machine cannon
P: Single cabins

I: Main atomic blast

Plans scaled for 25mm / 28mm figures can be downloaded from the author’s web site.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 111 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Upper Deck
The control room is the nerve centre of the ship. It’s also
cluttered, with positions for two pilots and an engineer, and a
chart table for navigation, and difficult to get past them to reach
important parts of the ship such as the airlock or the head without
jogging someone’s elbow.
Basic facilities in all cabins are single or double tier bunks, fitted
with safety straps, drawers and cupboards for clothing, and a
strong locker for valuables for each occupant. The cabin normally
used by the Captain has a small safe, big enough for his gun, some
confidential documents, a code-book for encrypted messages from the League, and a few thousand dollars
for emergencies. Needless to say every penny must be accounted for.
The head has a small WC, wash basin and shower, all fitted with air fans to suck out fluids in flight, and
all regularly going wrong and needing an engineer’s attention at some point during most flights. The usual
result of a malfunction is soaked clothes, but occasionally large blobs of water or less desirable materials
manage to escape. It’s customary for the person who caused the problem to mop up the mess.
The galley is a standard small design, with magnetic clamps to hold the cooking utensils in place, and
pots etc. fitted with clear lids for use in freefall. There are serious problems with cooking in low gravity
(e.g. blobs of boiling water / cooking oil spraying out around the ship, kitchen fires, etc.), but someone
with the Artist (zero gravity chef) skill, such as Ham Hammond, can handle it; it’s even possible to fry eggs
in flight if the frying pan is carefully greased and held at exactly the right angle. Without such a cook the
facilities are generally used to warm pre-packaged foods, with more normal forms of cooking left until the
ship is on the ground. The designers omitted a dedicated dining area; at meal times a folding table is set
up in the corridor between the cabins, and seats fold out from the corridor walls.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 112 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Pilot’s controls, HMSS Endeavour

Endeavour was specified by a committee, and is supposed to be useful in a variety of roles, but as usual
there had to be a few compromises. At a comparatively late stage the specification was changed to add
two more cabins, to house occasional passengers or extra crew members, which are awkwardly wedged in
on the lower deck, originally a machinery space with no accommodation.
As a result of these changes the ship is cramped and cluttered, especially on the lower deck, with
pipes, air ducts, and electrical junction boxes etc. obstructing movement. The lower cabins have limited
headroom and are adjacent to the recycling equipment, which hums loudly and makes odd gurgling
noises, and are intolerably noisy when the underjets are in use. They are also two airtight doors away
from the control room, galley, head, and other facilities; two extra space suits are kept on the lower deck
for emergencies, which may not inspire complete confidence.
Pipes run up the walls and across the ceiling, some low enough to bash someone in a hurry (e.g.
running to the forward turret). Fuse boxes and ducts protrude from the walls. As an example of the
engineering compromises, the only way to reload the machine cannon is to climb over the water tanks,
wriggle through a gap about eighteen inches high, and reach down to feed the belts in from above. This
takes about twenty minutes. If the cannon malfunction they can only be serviced from outside the ship,
by taking off some of the hull plating, which takes several hours. Cargo is also loaded and unloaded by
removing hull plating; a big cargo airlock would add too much weight, and a hatch without an airlock is
too great a safety risk. It’s safer to have an opening that can only be breached with the aid of heavy tools.
The ship is divided into four pressure sections, areas separated by armoured bulkheads and airtight
hatches. These are the upper deck (the control room and most cabins), the lower deck (containing the
lower cabins, weapons, and life support equipment, the hold, and the aft engineering compartment.
Internal doors within pressure sections are fire-retardant but won’t hold pressure.

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Lower Deck
Primarily designed as an engineering space, the lower
deck is cluttered and uncomfortable. The machinery in this
section includes air and water recycling systems, the forward
underjets (two massive steel cylinders containing small
downward-pointing atomic blasts), water tanks used partly as
a reserve for drinking, but also to trim the centre of gravity
of the ship, and the forward gun turret, containing two flame
cannon. Four machine cannon are installed behind the water
tanks, and difficult to reload in flight. The two cabins on this
deck are noisy and uncomfortable, with ducts and pipes
crossing the ceiling and reducing head room below 6ft at
some points. Since this deck is a separate pressure compartment two spacesuits are kept handy for
emergencies. They can’t be recharged on this deck, and must be periodically swapped for suits in the
recharge bay. The forward landing gear is under the deck aft of the underjets.
Hold
The hold is simply a large space, about 30ft long and 25ft to 20ft wide, with 10ft headroom under an
overhead catwalk linking the upper deck and the main engineering compartment. The deck is flat, with
ring bolts every few feet for securing cargo. One of the three fuel tanks (more precisely a fuel hopper,
since it contains powder rather than liquid, but the term is seldom used) is under the deck; the other two
are in the upper half of the hull to either side of the catwalk.
Aft Engineering Compartment
The aft engineering compartment is the cleanest and most organised part of the ship. It contains the
main atomic blast and controls for the other blasts, some basic engineering tools and a workbench, etc. A
radiation-protected hard spacesuit is kept in this compartment, for use by the Engineer. Two smaller
blasts used mainly for steering are built into the nacelles to either side of the hull, and can only be
serviced from the outside, by removing hull plating. The nacelles also house the rear underjets and landing
gear, and have an aerodynamic shape which generates some lift when Endeavour is flying in atmosphere.
Choosing Accommodation
Regulations require the pilots to be accommodated in the same pressure section as the control room,
so that they will be able to reach the controls quickly in an emergency. If the sample team is used the
most plausible allocation of cabins is thus Commander Palmer and Lieutenant Jones in one double cabin,
Patricia and ‘Ham’ Hammond in the other, and Professor Morton and Doctor Gerber in the single cabins
– Morton because nobody wants to share with him, Gerber because he wants privacy for his work and
files. Arrangements which put Patricia in a cabin alone or with anyone other than her husband are
unlikely.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 113 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Life support ducting, HMSS Endeavour

The airlock is about 30ft above the ground, with a folding metal ladder extending below the outer
hatch. The position is often a nuisance; it would have made more sense to put it on the lower deck, with
easier access to the ground and the hold, and no need to walk through the control room in spacesuits.
The adjacent suit recharge bay is a rack for six spacesuits, with hoses for replenishing their internal oxygen
tanks, supplies for the air filters, etc. As part of the process the suits are inflated to three atmospheres to
test that they have no leaks, with an alarm sounding if pressure drops, then deflated again. During this
process the arms and legs sometimes appear to move, which may startle the unwary. All of the suits
generally kept there are the general-purpose “soft” design.

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Adventure Seeds
… ‘talks with local law enforcement organizations on subjects of mutual interest;’ improved co-operation
on tracking fugitives, the trade in illegal drugs, piracy, etc.
The Space Pilot’s Association and the Union of Spaceship Engineers have again expressed concern about
attempts to develop automated control systems. Donald Cunigghiuni, representing the SPA/USE Local 32…
The newspaper story about the flight and Gerber’s real mission suggest several potential adventure seeds:
Fugitives
Most colonies have a few citizens with chequered pasts, fugitives who left Earth a step or two ahead of
the police and will probably never be able to return. In the colonies they build new lives, and in the
absence of opportunities for crime may become pillars of the community. At the moment there is little
cooperation between the police forces of Earth, the League, and the colonial authorities; each world
keeps its own records, but their police forces rarely compare notes – if they began to share criminal
records and information on fugitives as a matter of routine, things might become very difficult for these
escapees. The story can be read as implying that such a change is under consideration.
There isn’t much organisation behind these fugitives, but some of them are lethally dangerous
individuals who may feel that their future depends on stopping such cooperation before it ever starts.
One way to do this might be to eliminate Doctor Gerber; cooler heads will realise that this could be a
very bad move, attracting attention exactly where it isn’t wanted, and feel that the first move should be
to find out what Gerber is really up to. Either way, there’s likely to be some sort of impact on the
adventurers sooner or later.

Adventure Idea: Where No Man Pursueth

Eight years ago Boston neurologist Reginald Kemble killed his wife Rebecca and her lover, Doctor
Curtis Knight, Kemble’s former business partner, in a fit of jealous rage. Friends helped him to escape
off-world, and occasionally supply him with funds and news. He dreams of returning home, but his
friends warn him to keep clear – he would be arrested the second he returned to Earth. Kemble still
has nightmares about the murder, but can’t remember exactly how their argument escalated to the
point of murder – he had filed for divorce anyway, and already had ample evidence of her infidelity.
Today Kemble is working as a paramedic on one of the colonies. It’s the best medical job he can
get without papers. He’s tired of running. Hearing rumours that the search for fugitives may be
intensified, and that Endeavour (currently visiting his colony) is carrying the League official who is responsible for the
change, Kemble decides to surrender to the adventurers.
Assuming that they set the wheels in motion for extradition, they will then hear, days later, that Kemble isn’t
wanted. The “victims” are still very much alive; Rebecca divorced Kemble for desertion, married Knight, and
recently inherited the balance of Kemble’s estate when he was declared legally dead. But Kemble is adamant that he
murdered Knight and will refuse to budge from that position. It’s easy to conclude that he’s insane, but he still has a
couple of the letters warning him to keep clear, and the typeface doesn’t match any typewriter in the colony.
Oddly, the same typeface is used by two different alleged senders…
This can only be resolved by investigation on Earth, but the adventurers won’t be back there for months. They’re
going to have to run the case indirectly, sending instructions to detectives on Earth.
The truth is strange; Knight was aware of Professor Albert Ludwig’s development of a simulated environment
based on a combination of high-resolution film and drugs (see Pygmalion’s Spectacles) and added drug-enhanced
hypnosis to convince Kemble that he had killed Rebecca. The ‘friends’ who helped Knight to escape were actors
performing to the camera, unaware of the use to which the film would be put. Knight sent the letters and money.
No major crime actually occurred, and the time elapsed puts it outside the statute of limitations for criminal and
civil offences. Or does it? Kemble was only declared dead a year ago, and Rebecca and Knight knew he was alive.
Both are guilty of fraud, including tax fraud. The law doesn’t allow criminals to benefit from their crimes; if the
adventurers suggest it, the money confiscated from the couple may be given to Kemble as compensation.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 114 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Does the League plan to devote more resources to finding fugitives in the colonies? Thousands of
criminals drop out of sight on Earth every year, only a tiny minority go off-world. Most are in hiding,
dead, or keeping a low profile somewhere else on a very crowded planet. It would be possible to send
their records to the colonies on microfilm, but most of the colonies have tiny police departments; it’s
likely that nobody would have the time to read them. There are already system-wide alerts for a handful
of especially dangerous fugitives if there’s a specific reason to think that they’ve escaped from Earth,
more alerts on less dangerous criminals would probably be counter-productive. This will be the opinion of
any law enforcement officers consulted on this point, on Earth or on any of the colony worlds; any
change would be expensive and probably counter-productive.
Smugglers
There is a small drugs problem, but it’s currently most notable as smuggling of drugs from Earth to the
colonies. Drugs are most effective when their chemistry dovetails well with human biochemistry; this is
most likely with drugs derived from Terran sources. With the exception of a few oddball chemicals such
as Xixtchil, Ferverin, and Crephine, which happen to have metabolic effects on humans which are almost
totally dissimilar to the effects they produce in native species on their home worlds, most alien drugs are
toxic or have relatively minor effects on humans. Nothing found off-world is nearly
as potent or addictive as heroin, cocaine, or hexylamine, and there is a small but
lucrative market amongst the few colonists wealthy and desperate enough to pay for
smuggled drugs. The trade to Earth is mostly aimed at rich pleasure-seekers looking
for an exotic “high,” and relatively small. At least some of the off-world drugs on
Earth’s black market are fakes – a notable example was the “Venusian black lotus”
scam of 2106-7, in which New York and Washington sophisticates were sold dyed Bhang Ki Thandai (an
Indian beverage based on cannabis leaves, almonds, spices, milk and sugar) at exorbitant prices.
Ships arriving on Earth are subject to much more stringent customs checks than those that leave,
although the main reason for that is the search for other forms of contraband such as undeclared gems
and precious metals, Plutonian living crystals, and stolen Martian antiquities. Earth’s customs officers pay
relatively little attention to outgoing vessels, since there’s a general perception that all of the smuggling
goes the other way. In fact this perception is wrong. As well as drugs, the smugglers involved in this trade
are into many other rackets in the colonies, not least prostitution and “mail order bride” scams,
sometimes involving kidnapped or under-age women. They go unnoticed because nobody really bothers
to look, and because certain port officials are bribed to turn a blind eye. All that could change if the
League decides that it’s time to crack down on the drugs trade, starts taking more of an interest in
outgoing ships, and realises that drugs are just the relatively small tip of the iceberg.
The gangs involved will attempt to keep a low profile when Endeavour is around, and try to perpetuate
the illusion that any smuggling goes the other way. They might even set up a patsy to be caught smuggling
a relatively worthless quantity of drugs onto a ship to Earth.
Does the League plan to crack down on drug smuggling? Not at present. While the League does
oppose traffic in illegal drugs, in practice enforcement is primarily a matter for the customs authorities at
each port. It does take some interest in Martian antiquities (whose theft might provoke a Martian
response) and other looted materials, since the League charter frowns on the exploitation of “natives,”
but existing customs regulations seem to cover things reasonably well.
Human rights and in particular “trafficking in persons” are very much part of the League’s core
mandate, and have been so since its foundation, but so far the League is more or less unaware of the
extent of the problem; there have been occasional complaints that the agencies involved have been
dishonest when describing the ‘lovely’ young women in their catalogues, or have misled women about the
desirability of the men who are courting them at long range, but it isn’t obvious that organised crime is
involved. Evidence of an organised and illegal traffic would require an appropriate response.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 115 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Adventure Idea: Human Traffic
While the adventurers are on Venus, or another colony world with several isolated
settlements, they hear that an unidentified woman has been found, suffering from amnesia,
dehydration, and a fever, apparently the victim of a savage assault. If the adventurers
check it out they’ll find her in the local hospital, still delirious. Despite various drip feeds
etc. it’s obvious that she’s attractive. She occasionally mutters in a language that might be
Dutch or German – on a difficult Linguist roll it will be recognised as Afrikaans, implying that she is from South
Africa. If the suggested team of adventurers is used Commander Palmer will have an idea that he’s met her. One
possibility that the adventurers might come up with is that she’s a member of the Patrol, or someone he might have
met while serving in the Royal Navy, but they should think of it for themselves.
Eventually she recovers sufficiently to talk coherently; she’s Maryke Van Graan, a civilian Patrol employee, Chief
Astrogator at Cape Town Spaceport. Her job is to calculate and prepare flight plans for civilian and military ships.
About four weeks ago (plus travel time) she was abducted from a restaurant near the port; her last memory is of
waiting for her fiancée to arrive. She has no idea how she was transported off-world, or memory of the trip.
Her first memories after the abduction are waking on the bed of a remote cabin to find “a man pawing at me.”
She tried to fight back and was badly beaten, but somehow tripped him, causing him to fall and hit his head on the
cabin’s atomic power unit. The injury killed him. Once she was sure that he was dead she found maps that showed a
route to the town, took his Transkin™ over-suit and filter mask (or whatever other protective clothing is needed for
the planet in question), and set off to seek help. Unfortunately things went wrong – on Venus, for example, the
map was eaten by spores, on Titan she was lost in a wind storm – and her wounds went septic, leading to her fever.
• She’s been reported missing by her office; there was no report from her fiancée. Two ships made the trip from
Earth while she was missing; there would have been time for her to have been transported to either port.
• She wrote a flight plan for Palmer’s previous ship six years ago. He collected it; they had no other contact.
• If she’s questioned about her fiancée, she’ll name him as Piet Heerden from Durban, but she’s vague about his
details; it was a whirlwind romance and she’s only known him a few weeks. He was staying at the Liverpool
Hotel in Cape Town at the time of her abduction. He’s no longer there, and the address he gave doesn’t exist.
• If they try to trace the cabin she describes they’ll find it eventually, about half way between the two settlements;
unfortunately there is little left of her assailant. On Venus the cabin was left open and is now full of spores, on
Titan something has tried to eat the corpse, died, and been eaten, leaving scattered human and alien remains.
• If they check out the ships they will find that the passengers can be accounted for. The cargo has been unloaded
and delivered to various addresses around the ports. Most can easily be accounted for. If the adventurers
persevere they’ll find that one packing case seems to have vanished from the second ship’s cargo at some point
during unloading. The contents are described as “mixed personal items,” the delivery address doesn’t exist, and
the mass is about right for one person plus basic life support equipment and supplies for the journey.
There are two options:
• Maryke is telling the truth: Piet is a ‘recruiter’ who finds lonely attractive women for the ‘mail order bride’
racket. Their photographs are added to a catalogue circulated to clients in the colonies. Once someone takes an
interest in one of the women the racketeers use every possible trick to get as much money as possible to pay for
the trip and cover problems such as “sick relatives,” usually without the bride’s knowledge. Maryke wasn’t
interested in travelling off-world, but the customer was prepared to pay several thousand dollars on delivery, so
the racketeers had her kidnapped and shipped anyway. Her rapid escape has caught the racketeers off-guard,
and if the adventurers move fast they may be able to catch some small fry (such as the men who took the crate
and delivered her) before everyone goes to ground, and work back towards more important criminals.
• Maryke is lying: She worked for the racketeers, and has modified dozens of flight plans to cover the extra mass
and supplies needed for human cargo, drugs, etc. Piet was her contact, but Maryke got greedy and wanted a
bigger cut. She met him thinking that he would give her the money; instead he drugged her and had her shipped
to a particularly nasty customer, a profitable way to get rid of her. Proving this will be difficult, but she has
more money in her bank account than can be explained by her wages. Her account of her relationship with Piet
will sound a little off to a psychologist or detective, and some details will ring false to another woman – for
example, her description of the engagement ring is vague. Again, her rapid escape may make it possible to trace
the racketeers, and find other astrogators who have similarly large unexplained incomes.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 116 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Adventure Idea: Going Legit
Doctor Gary John of Ionian Products, a leading but less than reputable pharmaceutical and fur
exporter based on Io, has discovered that Io’s jungles are a near-perfect environment for growing
coca plants, and that a mixture of cocaine and Ferverin in the right proportions gives a prolonged
‘high’ with intense hallucinations. He and Sutherland Chalk, the CEO of the company, have
arranged to set up an experimental farm and processing plant on the edge of the jungle.
Ostensibly the farm is to trial cultivation and on-site processing of Ferva plants; actually it’s
growing and processing coca plants too, and stocks of both drugs are starting to accumulate.
Dr. John and Chalk want to negotiate a distribution deal with the smugglers, but haven’t researched the market
properly. There’s already too much cocaine on sale on Earth, prices are currently low, and it’s a lot easier to move
it around on Earth than smuggle it in from another planet. The smuggling gangs are happy with their existing sources
and don’t want to risk alienating them by buying elsewhere. On the other hand, the cocaine / Ferverin mix could be
VERY lucrative on Earth. This has led to an odd situation; the drug smugglers want Ionian Products to abandon
cocaine production and concentrate on Ferverin!
Since they can’t persuade the hapless pair to cooperate, they’ve decided that sterner measures are required;
they’ll be exposed as drug lords and put out of business by the League, then the smugglers will quietly buy up Ionian
Products, ramp up production of Ferverin, and ship it to Earth entirely legally. Fortuitously Endeavour arrives just as
matters come to a head…
Arriving on Io, the adventurers should receive an anonymous note:
Check out Ionian Products’ experimental farm on the edge of the jungle south
of Junopolis. They’re growing more than Ferva leaves there, look for the extra
fields and check the processing plant. Don’t let them ruin more lives!!!
A Friend

If the adventurers act on this advice they’ll soon figure out what’s going on – if the suggested team is used Patricia
will immediately know that there are Terran plants growing in some of the fields, although it will take her a while
(and possibly a message to botanists on Earth) to identify them as Coca plants, since she’s mostly worked on Venus
and the outer planets. Any competent policeman, customs officer, etc. should be able to spot cocaine. The Ionian
Products workers can identify Dr. John and Chalk as their employers, and claim not to know what they’re growing –
it’s just another plant that the bosses are interested in. Dr. John is on site at the processing plant, and will try to find
a way to get rid of the cocaine when the adventurers arrive, but won’t be done by the time the adventurers get to
him. If they are questioned both will blame their smuggling contact, a mysterious Mr. Smith, who is, of course,
nowhere to be found. They won’t mention the unusual potency of the cocaine / Ferverin mixture, judging that
they’re already in enough trouble.
If the adventurers take things at face value there will be a shareholders meeting electing a new board within days.
Soon the company will appear to be squeaky clean. Ferverin production will soon be ramped up, with exports to
Earth quadrupled, possibly setting the scene for another adventure further down the line.
If the adventurers don’t take things at face value they should be able to find out more about the mysterious
Mister Smith, who hasn’t been completely successful in covering his tracks. He’ll turn out to be Silas Jones, a very
recent investor in the company, who has taken advantage of the fall in share prices following the arrests to buy three
very large blocks of shares under different names, giving him a cheap controlling interest, and made it very clear that
he is an “ethical investor” who is determined to stamp out any trace of illegality in the company. Proving that he is
actually a senior figure in the drug smuggling ring should be difficult, and working out why he wants the Ferverin
should be very difficult until the modified cocaine hits the Terran market.
If another complication is wanted, before the coca fields are razed a scout party of Slinkers find them, sample the
exotic plant, and discover that it’s absolutely delicious – the best thing that they’ve ever tasted. There is no narcotic
effect on them, but they definitely want to get a lot more. By the time the adventurers are ready to destroy the field
Slinkers are already hard at work harvesting the crop, and will not be happy if someone uses e.g. a flame gun to
destroy the field and wipes out most of their tribe. This might lead to war with the Slinkers (see page 54), but wise
adventurers will let them help themselves and make sure that that the field is clear before destroying the remains of
the crop. In later years botanists will discover that the Slinkers are growing their own, but that’s a problem for
another day.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 117 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Union Trouble
The Space Pilot’s Association and the Union of Spaceship Engineers are the main American unions for
civilian space crew, with strong links to the AFL, CIO, and other labour organisations. In 2106 they
merged as the SPA/USE. Since most of the members are intelligent – stupid people rarely get jobs aboard
spaceships – they have taken steps to limit the power of the President of the union, and its local officials,
to ensure that organised crime can’t gain control. As an honest union with a strong interest in the welfare
of its members, the SPA/USE is a considerable thorn in the side of the Interplanetary Corporation, and
has for years been negotiating for better crew conditions, better safety equipment, and above all reliable
control systems that don’t require incessant supervision and correction.
They’re in favour of automated controls, provided that they aren’t used to replace skilled personnel.
Unfortunately the current owners of the New York Times are in the pockets of Interplanetary and
vehemently anti-union, seizing on any opportunity to make the SPA/USE look bad. The interview with
Donald Cunigghiuni was heavily edited – he was told that Interplanetary planned to use the new
technology to phase out skilled pilots and engineers in favour of robots, and reacted to that. The paper
will run a retraction in a couple of days, once the union’s lawyers get to work.
The story won’t fool most SPA/USE members, but several other unions with less impressive credentials
are taking an interest. Most notably, the Teamsters (who represent hundreds of thousands of
transportation employees on Earth) are secretly working with Interplanetary, which is a major employer
on Earth as well as in space, and plan to become the main spacefaring union if the SPA/USE can be
discredited. Word is spreading out from the Teamsters to their affiliates on other worlds, and the
Endeavour’s flight will be plagued by “spontaneous” cargo handler’s strikes etc. Meanwhile the SPA/USE
has asked its members to keep an eye on the progress of Endeavour’s trials, with a view to making sure
that any worthwhile advances reach the civilian sector as soon as possible.
This is most likely to be a problem in places where the population is primarily American; anywhere in
the United Americas on Earth, of course, Erotia on Venus, Nivia on Titan, and other American colonies.
For the most part it will be a low-key nuisance, not a serious problem. Until the time it isn’t…

Adventure Idea: Sabotage!
A few days after leaving one of the American colonies, the engineer notices atomic blast power
fluctuations; over a few minutes thrust doubles or quadruples, then dies back to 0.03g. This makes it
almost impossible to hold a steady course, since the timing of the phenomenon is very irregular.
Certainly no automated system, however sophisticated, could cope.
Instrument readings suggest that the blast is working normally but the fuel supply isn’t consistent.
The fuel feed (a complicated arrangement of pipes, electromagnets, and Archimedean screws that move the finely
ground iron ore) seems to be working normally. This leaves the fuel itself as the most likely suspect.
In order to keep the fuel load balanced, equal amounts are taken from each tank and combined at the engine
room. It’s possible to sample it as it enters the engine room; the mixture from the port upper tank looks different to
that from the other tanks – it’s darker and seems unevenly mixed. If it’s tested with e.g. a magnet it separates into a
mixture of slightly magnetic brown powder, with a small proportion of strongly magnetic dark grit, recognisable as
iron filings. The fuel from the other tanks is homogenous brown powder.
To find out more it will be necessary to get into the tank itself, but it’s difficult to access it in flight; they’re filled
from outside the hull, and designed on the assumption that they’re only going to be opened under gravity. If the
caps are opened clouds of powder will float up into the face of the person opening them, sticking to space suits,
especially to their boots. Once it’s open it’s possible to take samples from various depths. In the end it will turn out
that about 250lb of iron filings have been added to the tank via the aft filling hatch. The position suggests that they
went in after the rest of the fuel, probably within hours of takeoff since the engineer would have checked fuel
samples as it was loaded. Since the pure metal was denser and more magnetic than the ore it rapidly “sank” to the
rear of the tanks, and into the engine feed.
Continued next page

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 118 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Cutting off the fuel from the suspect tank isn’t difficult, and will fix the immediate problem, but that leaves the
ship short of fuel and increasingly unbalanced if the flight continues.
Provided that the adventurers fix this reasonably quickly it’s a nuisance rather than a serious problem. The actual
quantity of iron added is small enough that mixing it in more thoroughly will fix things. This can be done by shaking
the entire ship (using the underjets etc.), or by re-routing a few pipes so that the fuel from the affected tank goes
into the other two tanks, rather than directly to the engines; by the time it gets to the engine it will be thoroughly
mixed. Alternatively, most of the iron filings could be removed by a strong magnet – they’d tend to be attracted to
it much faster than the iron ore. Any method the adventurers come up with should be allowed to work, unless it
seems excessively stupid.
Investigating the incident isn’t entirely straightforward, because Endeavour is heading away from the landing field
at several miles a second, but that’s what radio is for. Eventually the local police will find two cargo handlers who
were on duty the night before takeoff and had access to the fuelling crane. Both are Teamsters, and claim that they
didn’t mean to do more than cause a minor nuisance, mess things up just enough that machines wouldn’t be able to
control the ship.
•

•

•

If the adventurers want to prosecute they will still have to do things by remote control, or wait months until
they’re back on the right world. The most logical charge is sabotage, but penalties range from long prison
sentences to death, since sabotage of a spaceship can be lethally dangerous. If convicted the workers will
become martyrs to the union cause, and the union problems will continue and start to affect other ships. They
may also extend to foreign unions, such as those in the British and Dutch colonies on Venus. Eventually things
will quieten down, but it will take longer, and in the end cost much more, than a little leniency.
A lesser charge such as vandalism has the useful side effect of making the saboteurs look less effective. The
penalty is a fine or a few months in prison, which ought to deter copy-cats, and they will lose their jobs. When it
becomes obvious that they’re gaining little more than ridicule the campaign against Endeavour will lose a lot of
impetus, and will gradually be forgotten as the union finds other causes.
If the adventurers don’t press charges at all then nothing will be done about the sabotage, and the union
members will be encouraged to continue to harass Endeavour. This is a continuing nuisance, rather than a
serious problem, and sooner or later adventurers will get used to harassment by pickets, biased reporting of their
activities, bar-room brawls, etc.

Trouble Shooting: If the adventurers don’t do anything to fix the fuel problem, raise the Difficulty of Pilot and
Engineering skill rolls related to the problem +1 per day:
Each failed Pilot roll adds a day to the journey
On a natural 11 or 12 Pilot roll add 2-4 days
On a natural 11 Engineering roll the atomic blast is out of action for 1D6 hours, adding 3D6 hours to the flight.
On a natural 12 Engineering roll the atomic blast needs major servicing taking 1-3 days and adding 2-6 days to
the flight.
If nothing is done, and the flight is prolonged beyond the ship’s life support endurance, the air starts to get a bit
stale and eventually everybody dies. It isn’t likely that players will be that stupid, but if they are their characters
must pay the price. Space isn’t a forgiving environment.

Automation
If Professor Morton is being run as a player character the player should make all decisions about the
nature and scope of his automation project. Getting from the current manual controls to a fully
automated suite will be a very difficult project, starting at Difficulty 6 and working up from there.
Automating the atomic blast is part of this project, but separate from it – it’s possible to improve the
controls without improving the atomic blast, or vice versa. Some suggested goals and times needed to
make improvements:
Difficulty 6: Study operations of flight controls and atomic blast – minimum study time two weeks or
one flight.
Difficulty 7: Simplify existing flight controls and atomic blast controls – minimum development time
four weeks and a minimum of two flights.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 119 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Difficulty 8: Rudimentary autopilot, not usable in asteroid belt or for takeoff/landing, can fly the ship
for 1-3 hours without course correction. Rudimentary automatic controls for atomic blast, usable
only at cruising acceleration, allow unattended operation for 2D6 hours. – minimum four weeks,
two flights.
Difficulty 9: Improved autopilot, not usable in asteroid belt or for takeoff/landing, can fly the ship for
2-6 hours without course correction, includes automatic meteor avoidance (but course must then
be corrected manually). Improved automatic controls for atomic blast, usable only at cruising
acceleration, allow unattended operation for 4D6 hours. – minimum four weeks, two flights.
Difficulty 10: Improved autopilot, not usable for takeoff/landing, can fly the ship for 2D6 hours
without course correction, includes automatic meteor avoidance and will return to course
automatically after evasion. Improved automatic controls for atomic blast, usable only at cruising
acceleration, allow unattended operation for 6D6 hours. – minimum four weeks, two flights.
Difficulty 11: Improved autopilot, usable during takeoff but not for landing, can fly the ship for 3D6
hours without course correction, includes automatic meteor avoidance and will return to course
automatically after evasion. Improved automatic controls for atomic blast, usable only at cruising
acceleration, allow unattended operation for 2-3 days. – minimum four weeks, two flights.
Difficulty 12: Autopilot as 11 and Pilot skill Difficulty reduced -1 when operating the controls
manually; no further improvement possible. Atomic blast as 11 but all Engineering skill rolls related
to the blast are now at -1 difficulty, no further improvement possible. – six weeks, three flights.
The end result should be a ship that is easier to operate, but still needs pilots and engineers to take
care of emergencies and keep things running smoothly. Players may have different or less realistic goals,
it’s up to the referee to decide what can and can’t be done. For example, in one of the play tests Morton
wanted to build a radio control which would let a skilled pilot fly the ship from the ground, with a range
of several miles; this was made Difficulty 9, with all of the steps at Difficulty 6 to 9 above needed before
the device could be built.
If Morton is being run as an NPC the adventure idea below may be useful:

Adventure Idea: Robert
Morton doesn’t just want to build an automatic pilot; he wants to build a robotic pilot, a mechanical
replacement for a human. The prototype is (inevitably) called the Morton Robotic Pilot, but everyone
else calls it Robert. It’s exactly like the robot in every B movie you’ve ever seen; incredibly literalminded, stupid, but capable of following orders provided that every step is detailed. This is, of course,
exactly what the unions don’t want. Although Morton talks it up as a solution to the problems of
spaceship operation, it doesn’t actually fly a spaceship very well. Attempts to improve it just make its
shortcomings more obvious; it’s slow, lacks the instincts and reflexes of a skilled pilot, weighs a quarter
of a ton, and is totally incapable of improvising if anything goes wrong. It is, however, very strong.
If Morton is allowed to continue developing the robot, it will be little more than a nuisance; every
so often he will want to let it fly the ship, if allowed to do so it works for a while then gradually loses the course, and
has to be ordered to release the controls. Gradually Morton will lose heart and return to more conventional forms
of automation, eventually following the steps outlined above. But if he is opposed in any way he will snap and order
Robert to obey his voice only, take the controls and stay there, and resist any attempt to remove it.
Robert (Robot pilot and thug)
BODY [8], MIND [2], SOUL [-], ATHLETE (RUNNING) [4], BRAWLING [8], PILOT [3], STEALTH [0]
PUNCH, EFFECT 8, A:B, B:KO, C:I+KO
Armoured, -4 Effect to all attacks. Disintegrating bullets approved for use aboard ship will not penetrate Robert’s
armour, but will penetrate its camera eyes or speaker grille (small targets, -2 to hit). For safety it shuts down if its
cameras stop working. It is also vulnerable to sonic stunners; on a C result some of the vacuum tubes shatter and it
collapses. Creative attacks on e.g. joints, service panels, etc. should also be allowed to work. Once Robert has been
disabled Morton will suffer a nervous breakdown, and leave the ship (heavily sedated) at the next port of call.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 120 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

To: Dr. Otto Gerber
League of Nations
Re: The Interplanetary Corporation
There is growing evidence that officers of the Interplanetary
Corporation are guilty of continuing corporate crime, going
back to at least the 2060s, with the intention of maintaining
a monopoly on civilian space travel. These crimes include
criminal negligence (various incidents of accidents and
deaths caused by poor maintenance and hostile working hours),
bribery and corruption of government and court officials, and
collusion in criminal activities in attempts to place the
Société Des Nations
spacefaring unions under the control of the Teamsters. Three
incidents are considered to be especially significant:
Economic Committee
Anti-Trust Subcommittee
∗ In the 2060s Interplanetary manipulated the American and
European patent systems and the courts to steal the
CONFIDENTIAL
thermoid expansion chamber originally developed by the
engineer Perry Maclane, one of the most important technologies in current atomic
blasts. As a result Maclane became a pirate; his ship, the Red Peri, is still
actively engaged in piracy under his daughter’s captaincy.
∗ The Venusian gold rush of 2110 may have been engineered by Interplanetary to
cause problems for their last big rival, the Planetary Trading Corporation; PTC
committed to build extra ships for the Venus route, but was unable to pay for
them when the rumours of gold were proved untrue and thousands of passages were
cancelled. Interplanetary acquired PTC’s assets at a fraction of their true
value, but the economic collapse that followed exceeded all expectations,
leaving Interplanetary dangerously over-extended. Interplanetary also came close
to collapsing, but under the direction of its new CEO, Richard Harrick, made a
gradual recovery. Harrick brought a good deal of new capital into the company,
and the sources are unclear. Since he took office it has become apparent that he
has intensified Interplanetary’s attempts to maintain a monopoly.
∗ An apparently unrelated incident, the crash of the Gunderson Europa Expedition
of 2110, is now attributed to sabotage by an agent who used the alias Kratska
but has since been identified as Ivor Gogrol, a known associate of Herrick. In
2111 Gogrol joined the second expedition and made another sabotage attempt,
which ended in his death. Interplanetary is now attempting to gain a monopoly on
Gunderson’s protactinium blast technology by means similar to those used in the
Maclane case.
The Economic Committee has ruled that the Interplanetary Corporation represents a
clear and present danger to Earth’s economic stability, and to the future of
Earth’s colonies. It has resolved to investigate all of the Corporation’s
activities, on Earth and in space, with a view to bringing criminal charges against
those officials complicit in criminal activities, and to breaking the monopoly by
splitting Interplanetary into at least two competing companies.
It is vital that these investigations remain secret until the Committee is ready
to take decisive action; for this reason all investigators have been given covers
related to law enforcement etc. Your meetings with local officials etc. should
always begin with this premise, and only refer to Interplanetary in passing until
you are sure that there is no problem; it is likely that some corrupt officials may
be in Interplanetary’s pockets, if so they must not be briefed on the Committee’s
plans.
Note: The pirate ″Red Peri" Maclane may have important information relevant to
this case, including documentary evidence. If there is any opportunity to
communicate with her you should do so. You are authorised to offer her a limited
amnesty for this purpose; however, she must not be led to believe that a pardon is
likely, or even possible. Psychiatric profiling suggests that she is dangerously
unstable, and would react badly if an offer was later withdrawn.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 121 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Richard Herrick
CEO, Interplanetary Inc.
BODY 5, MIND 6, SOUL 3
ACTOR (CONCEAL ORIGINS) 7, ATHLETE
(ROWING) 7, BRAWLING 8, BUSINESS 8,
LINGUIST (ITALIAN, RUSSIAN, GERMAN) 8,
MARKSMAN 8, MELEE WEAPON 7, PILOT
(SPACESHIP) 8, STEALTH 5, THIEF 8
Richard Harrick appears to be a self-made
millionaire with an impressive track record
on the stock market, but he’s actually a
member of one of New York’s major
criminal families. During the 2110 market
crash he bailed out Interplanetary with
$75 million, allegedly from a range of
private investors, but actually from the
New York mob and the Teamsters. They
expect a major return on their investment.
The only way to be sure of that is to get a
complete lock on civilian interplanetary
travel and the shipbuilding industry, by
driving smaller rivals out of business.
Harrick is not a “hands-on” villain; he’s
happy to work through proxies, indirectly
hired minions who will have no idea who is
really responsible for their orders. Gogrol1
was a rare mistake; he was the son of a
senior mob figure, groomed to eventually
become another senior Interplanetary
executive, and somehow concealed his
drug addiction. He was given the job of
stealing Gunderson’s formulae to ‘make his
bones’. He was supposed to steal the
papers during the first flight, but failed to
find them and panicked during the landing,
fearing that he would be ‘rubbed out’ as
the price of failure. He blamed the crash
on Jack Sands; Herrick believed him and
gave him a second chance, which led to his
unmasking and death.
1

Redemption Cairn

The Interplanetary Corporation
• If Gerber is a player character the player should be given
the memo on the previous page.
• If Gerber is an NPC this information should be revealed to
players as it becomes useful; for example, following an
unsuccessful attempt to kill Gerber, or during an encounter
with the Red Peri.
• Optionally the document could come to light after
Gerber’s death.
Interplanetary has always been ruthless, using all possible
means to maintain a near-monopoly on space travel and to
minimise costs, often at the expense of safety, and usually at
the very edge of legality. With the appointment of Richard
Herrick as CEO the company has stepped far over the edge.
The situation is actually considerably worse than is implied
by Gerber’s briefing; Interplanetary is behind several recent
“accidents” to ships belonging to smaller lines and independent
ship-owners, leading to long and expensive repairs and several
injuries, and has planted drugs and other contraband on
others. In the long term, the company is behind legislation to
impose new insurance practices that will discriminate against
smaller businesses. The legislation is due to be discussed by the
League in the first half of 2116, but Interplanetary are already
pushing hard for the change via lobbyists who claim to
represent accident prevention groups and other concerned
citizens.
Under the proposed legislation ship-owners will be required
to post a bond of 25% of the replacement value of the most
expensive ship they have insured. For Interplanetary this is a
relatively minor one-off expense; their most valuable ship is
worth a little over $2 million, so the bond costs about five
hundred thousand dollars, easily available from the company’s
operating capital. Smaller businesses and independent
operators generally own less valuable ships, but have much less
liquid capital. Independent operators faced with a sudden bill
for 25% of the value of their only ship will have real trouble
raising the money; their ships may already be heavily
mortgaged, and Interplanetary will do all it can to ensure that
banks etc. are unsympathetic.
Similar bonding schemes are proposed for spaceship
builders and related engineering companies. Interplanetary
would again be able to absorb the costs relatively easily, its
rivals would not.
Boyds of London, the main spaceship insurers, have done
their sums; if the new bond scheme is introduced they estimate
that there will be a short-term gain followed by long-term
losses. Roughly 30% of the smaller lines and independent

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 122 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

operators will go out of business, with their ships either scrapped or taken over by Interplanetary or
another large carrier. On the whole large carriers pay a smaller proportion of the value of their ships in
premiums, since they are generally considered to be better risks, and the end result would be a significant
reduction in income. They’re handling this by lobbying League representatives in Geneva and their home
nations, making the case against the insurance change (on the grounds, of course, that the smaller carriers
will suffer; Boyds’ profit margin isn’t mentioned). Gerber is just senior enough that he might be consulted
about the legislation, so Boyds will do their best to present their views in the best possible light. Naturally
they are aware that Interplanetary are behind the proposals; you can’t really keep something like that
secret when so many people are involved.
Actuaries at Boyds have also noticed the rise in accidents, and determined that some were probably
the result of sabotage. Boyds has teams of investigators at work, and they will inevitably cross paths with
the adventurers eventually. Their typical investigatory team consists of an engineer or pilot and a
detective, with any other specialists hired as needed. Boyds Investigators have a good reputation with law
enforcement on Earth and throughout the colonies.
Optionally the final player in this game is Red Peri, still active after at least forty years of piracy, and
aware that Interplanetary is stepping out onto very thin ice. If she’s still around, she has confidential
documents recently confiscated from the safes of Interplanetary ships, including messages to the company
offices on Mars, Venus, and Ganymede. There’s nothing immediately incriminating, but a careful reading
of the documents shows that Interplanetary is counting on being able to buy up the assets of its
competitors at bargain rates over the next two to four years, expects to be building protactinium blast
ships within ten years, and appears not to have factored patent royalties into its operating expenses for
these ships. Note that if Red Peri does become involved, Boyds will be hot on her trail; her crimes face an
automatic death penalty if she can be captured and tried in a British court.
Harrick knows that some sort of investigation is under way, but doesn’t have an informant at a high
enough level to learn exactly what is planned. Gerber is one of four League officials with a background in
law enforcement and economics who are currently off-world and may be involved in the investigation. It’s
possible that one or another of these officials may be vulnerable to seduction, bribery, threats, etc.
Interplanetary may also consider sabotaging the ship or arranging an “accident” to delay the investigation,
but this is very much a last resort – there’s nothing more likely to attract more official attention.

Adventure Idea: The Hunting Party

While visiting one of the British colonies on e.g. Venus or Io, the adventurers are invited to
join a hunting party organised by the Deputy Governor in one of the more habitable areas, e.g. the Cool
Country on Venus, the borders of the jungle on Io. It’s an opportunity to relax with the cream of colonial
society, and there’s a hint that there might be an opportunity to discuss “delicate matters that it might be impolitic
to discuss in a formal setting.”
This isn’t exaggeration; the Deputy Governor has learned that the Governor is taking bribes from Interplanetary,
and does all that he can to smooth things for visiting Interplanetary ships, while making life as difficult as possible for
their rivals.
Unfortunately the Governor knows that the Deputy Governor is planning to , and has made his own plan to
discredit his deputy, by framing him for theft. One of the women accompanying the expedition will claim that her
rubies have been stolen, and plant them in his belongings.
Unknown to the Governor, someone else in the party has his or her own plans for the ‘robbery victim’, who will
turn up dead soon after making the accusation; maybe the murderer is a jealous lover who thinks that she had an
assignation with the deputy governor, maybe she’s been blackmailing someone – the motive is left for the referee.
Run this as a murder mystery, with a cast of suspicious-looking characters, the adventurers hampered by the
remote location (for some reason it will take at least a couple of days for help to arrive, e.g. a landslide has blocked
the route they used to reach the camp site) and lacking forensic equipment etc. unless they can improvise
something. It’s time to use those little grey cells…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 123 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Keeping the Peace
Above all else, it’s the duty of the Patrol to keep the peace and suppress piracy. Mostly this is done by
the simple act of patrolling; flying the space lanes and keeping alert for trouble, checking ship movements
and compliance with the provisions of the Interplanetary Treaty, and by doing so reminding troublemakers that the League is a force to be reckoned with. At most times at least half the League fleet is in
space, with the remainder on standby for emergencies or docked for maintenance, leave, etc. Endeavour
is one of the smaller long-range ships; others include the short-range rescue ships which respond to piracy
and other incidents near Earth and long-range high-capacity transports. Actual acts of war are
comparatively rare, but occasionally Earth’s conflicts spill out into space and the Patrol must be ready to
handle such situations as they arise.

Adventure Idea: Warlord of Mars
When the Japanese Empire fell at the end of the Pacific War, several garrisons in China refused to
surrender. The current Chinese keeps these last outposts isolated but hasn’t attempted to drive the
soldiers out. The Chinese use mortars to fire propaganda leaflets into the Japanese camp, the Japanese retaliate with
loudspeakers and radio broadcasts asserting Japanese sovereignty. Occasionally soldiers surrender, and are deported
to Japan. It’s illegal to supply the Japanese encampments, but smugglers sometimes get an aircraft or rocket past the
Chinese blockade. Occasionally the Japanese mount raids into the areas around their bases to steal food.
The largest of these holdout garrisons was commanded by General Seitarou Ito. A week ago the Chinese
commander in the area sent in a routine request that the Japanese surrender. To his surprise they asked for his
terms. It became apparent that Ito and other officers had vanished, leaving junior officers in charge. With his
departure morale plummeted, leading to the surrender. The Chinese have learned that Ito, three other officers and
twenty soldiers boarded a smuggler’s rocket, killed the smugglers, dumped the cargo, and took off. A search of Ito’s
quarters has found a large library of books and articles about Mars and the enigmatic Martians. In the absence of
other evidence, the Chinese are assuming that Ito is en route to Mars, and has notified the League accordingly. He is
wanted for looting, executing prisoners, and other crimes. The other officers have similar allegations against them.
Endeavour is en route to Mars when the warning comes in. With the small antennae of a spaceship it takes nearly
an hour to receive the entire message, with many repetitions, then another hour to decode it. Mars does not reply
to messages; it could just be a radio breakdown, but the silence is worrying. While Ito’s reasons for visiting Mars are
unknown, his ship is probably headed for the only permanent colony, on the equator near Syrtis Parva; the field has
landing lights and other aids, and Ito’s pilot is presumably relatively inexperienced and will need all the help he can
get. Endeavour is also headed there, but has ample fuel and much more manoeuvrability, and is equipped to land on
unprepared areas. It will be possible to reconnoitre and if necessary land out of town. The League is always wary of
antagonising the Martians, and it’s vital that this is resolved as fast as possible and with minimum harm to them.
Ito has, of course, arrived, and his soldiers (armed with rifles, explosive bullets and flame guns) are holding the
colony. His ship is on the landing field, but the landing gear and main blast have been badly damaged by a crash
landing. It can’t take off again without major repairs.
Ito’s motive is simple; he has stomach cancer, and wants one of the Martian radioactive stones to cure his illness.
He hasn’t gone to one of the hostpitals that has one, such as John Hopkins in Baltimore, because he knows he will
be arrested; instead he’s trying to force the Martians (the Thoth) to give him a stone. He’s shot two humans and a
Martian (non-fatally) to prove that he’s serious, and shown the Martians pictures of the stones so that they know
what he wants.
The adventurers should arrive as this situation is reaching its climax, and encounter a Thoth who is bringing in
one of the stones. What he doesn’t explain, because he isn’t sure who the adventurers are, is that there are several
hundred mound-builders on his trail, all of them determined to get the stone back and totally indifferent to their own
safety. The Thoth plan is to delay things until the mound-builders are a few minutes away, give Ito the stone, then
free the hostages in the confusion as the mound-builders arrive to take it back.
In play-testing this ended with Ito carried away by the mound-builders, all shouting ‘We are v-r-r-riends! Ouch!’
while Ito’s troops went down fighting and the adventurers, aided by the Thoth, rescued the prisoners. Of course the
adventurers may have other plans, such as using the stone to haggle for Ito’s surrender. But the mound-builders will
arrive sooner or later, smashing buildings and trampling anyone who gets in their way.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 124 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

With A Pinch of Salt

O

NE of the problems common to all of the
Venusian colonies is the lack of convenient
supplies of metals and other minerals, most
notably salt.

As elsewhere, the colonists rely on atomic blasts for
power; while the uranium fuel can be imported from Earth
and lasts for years, the blasts also need a supply of lighter
material to break down to generate energy. Sodium in the
form of sodium chloride is the ideal conversion mass for
uranium blasts; cheap, usually abundant, and easily
handled. Unfortunately it isn’t readily available on the
more habitable parts of Venus; there are no oceans, in
most areas the ground is too unstable to allow mining, and
Venusian rivers run deep below the surface of the Hotland
swamps and out into the Brightside deserts, taking
dissolved minerals and salt with them. They eventually
evaporate or explode as geysers as the water meets nearmolten rock. The evaporating water leaves behind layers of
salt and other minerals, in flats which cover thousands of
square miles.
Factory crawlers are used to collect these minerals and purify
them for shipment to the colonies. It makes no economic sense
to collect salt alone; it’s far more efficient to feed some of the
salt into an atomic blast and use the power to process the most
useful materials in situ. Typically the output of a factory is a ton
of purified salt and a quarter ton of iron, aluminium and other
light metals and nitrates per day. While this isn’t a cheap way to
extract minerals, it’s cheaper than shipment from Earth.
The factories can move at up to 10 MPH (but usually limit
speed to 5MPH) and cost several hundred thousand dollars to
construct. Facilities include air-conditioned living quarters for a

The ‘Grand Tour’ Campaign
This is a good introductory adventure if
you’re using HMSS Endeavour and the
‘Grand Tour’ campaign described above,
with Venoble on Venus as the first port
of call.
As stated in the newspaper story that
introduces the campaign, Endeavour left
Earth several weeks after the Earth-Venus
conjunction, arriving on Venus at a time
when salt stocks are at their lowest. An
additional problem is disrupting supplies.
Endeavour has a radium blast and uses
iron salts rather than sodium compounds,
and left Earth with full tanks, so the
shortage doesn’t affect her; she has
enough fuel to reach Earth or Mars.
However, investigating the problem and
fixing things is well within the Patrol’s
remit, since it helps keep the colony
functioning and doesn’t conflict with
other duties.
If the adventurers are using a ship that
has a uranium blast they should have
enough salt for a couple of point-to-point
flight anywhere on Venus, but not
enough to fly to another planet. This
gives them an additional reason to be
interested in solving the problem, but if
they aren’t, there is no point trying to
force the players to cooperate; they can
fly to one of the other Venus colonies
and refuel there instead.
Civilian adventurers will be offered
money to investigate, or to transport a
team of trouble-shooters to investigate.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 125 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

crew of ten or twelve men, loading bays for the amphibious trucks that carry supplies and goods to and
from the factories, and everything else that might be needed for their arduous task. Under ideal
conditions a good driver can leave the Cool Country, cross the Hotlands, reach the Bright Side and
rendezvous in about a week, and return in similar time, but if conditions are poor it can take a day or two
longer. Trucks are sent out once a week, or as soon as one is available if there are unusual delays. Usually
this averages out so that about ten to twelve tons of minerals are delivered every week, about 75% of it
salt. This may seem a lot, but a typical passenger ship or large freighter on the Earth-Venus route needs a
hundred tons of salt to refuel. Salt gathering continues throughout the year, regardless of demand, so that
there are adequate stockpiles when Venus is closest to the Earth.
Britain’s colony is supplied from a crawler owned by Harlech Hallta Ltd. (a Welsh company whose
name simply means Welsh Salt Ltd.) When the adventurers arrive on Venus it is nearly three weeks since
their last truck returned to Venoble, and salt stocks are getting dangerously low. The colony’s power
plants need a regular supply, as do the ferry rockets that supply Xixtchil traders. Most other vehicles and
the isolated huts used by traders run on atomic batteries and will be unaffected in the short term.
Due to continuous massive radio interference from storms around the Mountains of Eternity it isn’t
possible to contact the crawler or the trucks; radio has a range of a few miles at best. The only way to
find out what’s happening will be to travel to the crawler.
There’s no need to be particularly subtle in introducing the situation to adventurers; the local papers
are running worried stories about the shortage of salt, with suggestions that the League or the colonial
government should do something about the situation. These suggestions range from martial law to
nationalisation of the salt factories. One idea that may be suggested by the adventurers, flying one of the
colony’s small supply rockets out to look for the crawler, has been tried but failed; the rocket didn’t have
the fuel endurance to fly a prolonged search at low altitude, and couldn’t find anything on a quick
overflight of the estimated position of the crawler.
If adventurers are League personnel, serving aboard Endeavour or another ship, the colonists will
initially assume that they are there specifically to resolve the problem. If League headquarters are told
about it they will be ordered to lend all possible assistance.
If they are civilians, there will soon be several enquiries about chartering their ship, from Harlech
Hallta Ltd., from the Governor of the colony, and from the local chamber of commerce. Let them haggle
up to a maximum of £2,000 ($6,000); if they demand more than that there will be long delays and
angry newspaper stories about the adventurers “profiteering from the salt crisis,” companies that might
have otherwise hired them to carry cargo will suddenly decide that the publicity will be too bad, and so
forth. Unless they help, Venoble won’t be a good place to do business in future.
If there are delays the situation slowly gets worse. After a week the Governor orders the power plants
to shut down to conserve power, from 01.00 hours to 06.00 hours every “night”1 This reduces salt
consumption a little but causes problems for industrial users, hospitals, etc.

The Situation (Referees Only)
Driving amphibious trucks across Venus is a reasonably wellpaid job, but it’s boring and it’s not possible to get rich that
way. On Venus the main sources of wealth are Xixtchil pods
and native silver artefacts, which is why there are scores of
traders in the Hotland swamps. It’s against the Harlech Hallta
company rules to stop to trade with the natives, but most of
1

There aren’t nights as such, since Venus is tidally locked, but the settlements keep to the time zones of their founding countries’
capitals; Greenwich Mean time for the British colonies, Eastern Standard Time for the American colonies, and so forth.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 126 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

the drivers will do so given the chance, and carry trade goods such as knives, beads, and mirrors to swap
for more valuable merchandise.
There are several reasons why the company prefers its drivers to stay clear of the natives. One is that
they’ve been known to attack traders without warning; another is that a prolonged haggling session can
take hours. More importantly, while the drivers have Transkin oversuits and filter masks and the trucks
have filtered air supplies and spray equipment to get rid of spores if the driver’s cab has to be opened, the
equipment is supposed to be for emergency use only. Until now that hasn’t been a problem;
unfortunately their luck has just run out.
The company currently has four trucks in service, numbered 03 to 06; earlier trucks have been
“retired” and scrapped. O3 was the last to return. Three weeks ago, half way across the swamps, 04 ran
into a band of natives and stopped to trade. Somehow a dough-pot spore got into the cab while the door
was open, and survived the spray. The cab was cool, and there wasn’t anything for the spore to eat, apart
from crumbs on the floor, so the dough-pot only grew to the size of a pea by the time the truck reached
the factory crawler.
Because it takes a lot of power to start or stop a crawler, goods are transferred from the crawler to the
truck, and vice versa, while the vehicles are moving. The truck drivers take it in turns to board the crawler
to shower before heading back to Venoble.
Unfortunately one of the drivers (Brian Jones) trod on the tiny dough-pot just before getting out of
the truck to board the crawler, and went straight to the showers, carrying it to a warm moist environment
on the sole of his boot. While he was showering it ate a towel, then ate him when he opened the shower
door. After that it moved into the air ducts; before anyone was aware of the situation it reached the
factory’s control cab and attacked the drivers. As they were being attacked they lost control of the
crawler and it suddenly swerved to the right and ran down the truck, crushing it under its massive
caterpillar treads, then carried on with nobody at the wheel, going wildly off course. Meanwhile the
doughpot continued to attack the crawler’s crew, and everybody aboard was either eaten or jumped out
to escape. Bright Side temperatures are well above the boiling point of water, and all of the escapees are
now dried out corpses, twenty-five to thirty miles back along the trail of the crawler.
After thirty miles the crawler hit a patch of thin crust over a geyser and the first two sets of caterpillar
tracks broke through, stopping the crawler. Occasional eruptions fill the crawler with steam, but the air
conditioning was still working and the dough-pot survived inside the vents.
When Truck 05 found the crawler’s trail and tracked it down, a week later, the drivers didn’t realise
what was happening, and made the mistake of boarding the crawler to investigate. While doing this they
closed the loading bay doors, so that the cooling system would make it more habitable. Sensing the
change the dough-pot moved into the factory again, catching the drivers before they could escape.
Truck 06 ran into a series of mud geysers as it crossed the swamps, and is massively behind schedule
and well off course. At the time the adventurers first learn about the salt “crisis” it is still two days away
from the crawler. If they take immediate action and get to the crawler first there is a good chance that
they will save the lives of the drivers; if they delay, there will be two more deaths as history repeats itself.
The other driver (Peter Cross) is still alive aboard Truck 04, but seriously injured. The rear half of the
truck is smashed, but fortunately the power plant survived. He doesn’t know what happened aboard the
factory; all that he knows is that the crawler smashed the truck, and half-crushed the cab. Both of his legs
are broken, and he was unconscious for several hours. Miraculously the air conditioning continued to
work, and he was able to close the gaps in the windscreen with duct tape. But he’s in continuous pain and
his food and water are slowly running out. He has no idea what happened aboard the crawler; all that he
knows is that when he woke it had vanished over the next ridge, and he could see bodies in the sand in its
trail. In view of his injuries he hasn’t been able to investigate. He will also die if the adventurers don’t
investigate quickly.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 127 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Harlech Hallta Ltd.
Venoble’s only factory crawler is run by
Harlech Hallta Ltd., a Welsh company
which formerly operated salt mines on
Earth before the atomic blast made sea salt
extraction much cheaper. The name
translates as “Welsh Salt Ltd.” Most of
the employees are Welsh. The company
owns four ten-ton amphibious trucks which
are each crewed by two drivers and
operate on a rotating cycle; basically, the
drivers get one day off for each two days
they’ve been travelling, to a maximum of
ten days off, then set off for the factory
again. Since travel times are unpredictable
it’s a good job for unattached men.
The company has a good reputation; its
products are pure, wages are slightly above
industry standard with a good safety
record, and its trucks and other equipment
are well-maintained. There haven’t been
any recent changes in management or
operating procedures.
Huw Davies, Manager
BODY 3, MIND 4, SOUL 5
QUOTE: “There was a mud geyser on that
route last time, go further west.”
ACTOR (SING) 7, BRAWLING 4, BUSINESS 7,
DRIVING 6, MARKSMAN 6, MECHANIC 6
Davies manages the company from its HQ
in Venoble. His hobby is choral music, and
he sings with the Venoble Welsh Choir. He
is regarded as a pillar of the community.
He’s very worried about the situation.
Three trucks are currently out, presumably
en route to or from the factory.
Truck 04: Brian Jones & Peter Cross
Truck 05: Arthur Williams & James Jones
Truck 06: Richard Jenkins & John James
All have DRIVING 6-7, MECHANIC 5-7
Truck 03 is ready for departure, but
Davies has decided to wait another week
before sending it out, since the others
haven’t returned. The drivers, Ben Walton
& Thomas Cohen, are doing maintenance
and warehouse work pending departure.
Other employees include Jane Davies,
Huw’s wife, who is also office manager,
and William Williams, mechanic.

Preliminary Enquiries
If the adventurers want to help resolve the problem, they
may wish to begin by finding out more about factory
crawlers, the company, etc. However, enquiries will take
time, which affects the number of survivors as described
above.
There’s nothing especially suspicious or unusual about
Harlech Hallta Ltd; it’s a profitable business that employs
about twenty people and usually runs smoothly. It has a
warehouse, garages, and offices in Venoble.
The drivers live in company-owned apartments above the
garages where the trucks are kept. If the adventurers have a
legitimate reason to investigate – for example, if they are
League personnel or working for the company or the
chamber of commerce – Huw Davies will let them into the
rooms of the missing drivers. Walton and Cohen will object if
their rooms are searched, but Davies has the last word.
The main discovery to be made here is that all of the
drivers have some trade goods in their rooms, and most have
an item or two of native craftsmanship, or a small bag of
Xixtchil pods, worth a few thousand dollars on Earth. It’s not
impossible that they’ve acquired the material locally – traders
have been known to sell these things if they’re short of cash,
rather than waiting until they return to Earth – but it’s very
unlikely that all of them would be able to make that sort of
deal. It’s much more likely that they’ve been trading with the
natives, in defiance of company policy. Davies will explain the
reasons for this but won’t emphasise the risk of
contamination; although there’s a safety rule it’s never been a
problem, he’s much more worried about the waste of time.
Since he has little personal experience of the swamps he
thinks of this as a risk of disease, not in terms of being rotted
alive by a fungus, or a man-eating monster getting aboard the
trucks or the crawler.
Adventurers with experience of the Hotland swamps, such
as the Hammonds, know better. There’s a high death rate
amongst traders, and most of the deaths aren’t pleasant.
Don’t over-emphasise this point, Hotland species can’t survive
long under normal Bright Side conditions, but make it clear
that he underestimates the danger.
If questioned, Walton and Cohen will eventually admit
that “everybody does it”; it’s the easiest way to earn some
extra money, and it “doesn’t do any harm.” They don’t
encounter natives on every trip, but it’s common enough that
they always carry some trade goods. Davies will pretend to be
furious, but he isn’t really very surprised, it’s happened

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 128 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

before. While company policy forbids it, he can’t afford to lose competent drivers. It isn’t easy to drive in
the treacherous conditions of the swamps, and if he fires anyone it will take weeks to train a replacement.
If the adventurers want more information on the salt crawler, show them the plan below. A larger
version scaled for 25/28mm figures can be downloaded from the author’s web site.

The salt crawler is a massive vehicle designed in two coupled sections, running on sixteen sets of caterpillar tracks. A
mixture of salt, rock, and sand is scraped onto a conveyor belt (1) under the control cab (2). Ducts feed it into two
atomic blasts (3) where some of the salt is converted to energy, with the rest of the material converted to gas in the
expansion chambers (4). The superheated gas is fed into a vortex chamber (5) which concentrates the gas, and
eventually feeds it through a flexible duct into a magnetic separator (6) which sorts the material into its component
compounds which are collected electrostatically. Crew quarters (7), the showers (8) and galley (9) are alongside the
separator. At the end of the vehicle a conveyor (10) takes ingots of metal and tubs of salt etc. from the separator.
They’re stored (11) for transfer to the trucks via an extending conveyor (12). Waste sand etc. is dumped via a
chute under the rear chassis of the crawler.

Davies has much more detailed engineering diagrams, of course, and points out that the basic plans
only show the main features – for example, there’s a maze of pipes and ducts under the deck and
overhead for plumbing, life support, salt transfer, etc. It’s also probably not nearly as tidy as shown; there
are usually crates of supplies and other odds and ends tucked away wherever there’s room for them.
The map shows the geography of
the northern edge of British Venus.
The most obvious physical features on
the map are the Mountains of Eternity,
whose highest peaks exceed 20 miles,
forming the main border between the
British and American zones. There are
continuous electrical storms around the
mountains, with the static making longrange radio impossible. For most of its
length the range is considered an
impenetrable barrier. Despite this it’s
only a landmark for a few miles north
and south of the range; continuous low
cloud means that the upper slopes and
peaks are rarely visible. The swamps
don’t have many landmarks, since the terrain is continually churned by buried rivers, mud spouts, etc.,
and the salt flats aren’t much better. About the only constant is the sun, and even that is diffused by
clouds, making it impossible to use it to take an exact bearing. Navigation is thus very “hit and miss”; the
rockets that supply traders use extremely expensive inertial navigation systems, other vehicles have to rely
on odometers, compasses, dead reckoning, and short-range radio.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 129 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

All of this means that the position of the crawler is only known approximately. Four weeks ago, when
the last truck left the crawler, it was at the point indicated by the Salt Flats label on the map, driving in a
slowly expanding spiral. When the crew were killed it was further south and heading east, and its final
resting place is approximately 500 miles into the Bright Side due east of Venoble.

The Salt Flats
Sooner or later the adventurers should set off to find the crawler:
•

If HMSS Endeavour is used, or another ship or aircraft equipped for sustained horizontal flight, the
best way to find the crawler is to fly below the cloud cover, looking out for tracks. Although the
surface of the flats is often disturbed by wind storms and geysers, the crawler is so big and churns up
the sand and salt so much that it will be weeks before its tracks are completely obliterated:
o

•

Finding the tracks is relatively easy, requiring a Difficulty 4 Pilot roll to reach the right area, then
Difficulty 6 to find the tracks, falling by 1 for each hour spent flying over the area, rising by 1 on a roll
of 11-12:
 A success means that the ship has found the tracks, but it’s up to the adventurers to decide
which way they want to follow them, and come up with a strategy for locating the crawler.
 On a natural 2 the adventurers find Truck 04 and its driver, Peter Cross. Unless they have
wasted at least two days he’s alive but badly dehydrated. If not, they find the crushed truck,
Cross dead inside it, and more bodies strewn along the trail.

If the adventurers have a ship that’s designed mainly for vertical flight, without underjets, they won’t
be able to fly low for extended periods. The best that they can do is make a series of short hops, up
into the cloud layer then dropping down again a few miles away, looking out for signs of the crawler:
o

Finding the tracks requires an initial Difficulty 5 roll to reach the right general area, then Difficulty 7 to
find the tracks, falling by 1 for each “hop”, rising by 1 on a roll of 11. Using an electric plumb to
gauge altitude before exiting the cloud layer reduces the Difficulty -1:
 A success means that the ship has found the tracks as above.
 On a natural 2 the adventurers find Truck 04 as above.
 On a 12 the ship comes down too fast, and the pilot must roll versus Difficulty 8 to avoid a
crash landing:
• On a 12 the ship crashes hard enough to need 1-3 days of repairs. Everyone aboard
must resist an Effect 6 impact A:B+F, B:I, C:I+KO
• If the roll fails on 11 or less the ship crashes hard enough to damage the landing gear.
• On a success the ship lands, everyone aboard is shaken but unharmed.

Once the adventurers have found the tracks, the next problem is to work out which way the crawler was
travelling. If Cross or his truck have been found, or any of the dehydrated bodies scattered along the trail,
it’s comparatively simple to work out – this should be an automatic success unless someone does
something truly stupid. Additionally, by the time the adventurers are that close the crawler’s radio beacon
should just be audible over the background interference.
If the adventures are further away when they find the
tracks, the solution is simple; as the crawler moves along
the ground the surface is flattened, then as the last
section of the track lifts off the ground the pressure is released. The back edge of the track section lifts off
first, and debris falls in from the gaps between the tracks. The result is that there is a slight slope on the
indentations left by the track. They’re deepest in the direction the crawler is moving. This will be spotted
on an easy Detective or Military Arms roll.
Don’t make things too difficult for the players; if the adventurers work on it they should soon find the
crawler. Then their problems really start…

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 130 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Salty Badness
There are several bodies on the sand over the next five miles after the truck wreck. All of them are
wearing thermal suits, but they’re only designed to protect the wearer for a few hours. The water tanks
are empty, and the corpses are obviously dehydrated. One of the suits is empty, apart from some grey
dust.
Venus Thermal suit – $300 (Venus price) – 25 lb, BODY 3, Armour 1.
Add $30 for a suit tailored to a perfect fit.
Thermal suits are similar to the suits worn by spaceport fire-fighters on Earth, fitted with a radium-powered
cooling system to keep the wearer comfortable at high temperatures. Since Bright Side air is breathable if it is chilled
there’s no need for self-contained oxygen supplies; instead the wearer uses a breathing mask connected to the
cooling system. The suits issued by Harlech Hallta incorporate a one-gallon water tank, a short-range radio, and a
rations pack.
These suits are designed only for Bright Side conditions, not the Hotlands; they don’t have the air filters used in
Transkin suits, and have no resistance to the acids etc. secreted by Hotland creatures such as dough-pots.
NB: Space suits are a good substitute for thermal suits and have some resistance to Hotland spores etc., but they
are not a complete defence; some of the metal fittings are vulnerable to e.g. a dough-pot’s acids.

If the adventurers find the empty suit they will hopefully be VERY wary. The dust inside it is the remains
of one of the crawler operators, who inhaled dough-pot spores before escaping, and was literally eaten
from the inside out, including the bones. Fortunately the suit’s cooling system was destroyed by the
dough-pot’s acid, and it has long since dried to nothingness. Even the spores have been sterilised, but they
will be recognisable as dried spores if examined under a microscope. The species cannot be determined.
Once they find the crawler they ought to think of checking the exterior. On the whole it looks
undamaged, although the front four sets of caterpillar tracks are submerged in a pool of bubbling white
brine, and there is salt all over the first thirds of the hull. The driver’s window is shattered. The factory
loading doors are closed. There are no other windows; they cause too many problems with the cooling
system etc.
There is another truck, number 05, parked about fifty yards behind the crawler. It’s unoccupied, and
doesn’t contain any useful clues.
Eventually the adventurers should take a look inside the crawler. The interior is very hot (but cooler
than the salt flats) and very messy, with signs of damage and grey dust everywhere, and steam billowing in
from the broken windows of the driving cab. It’s too hot for the steam to condense on the walls, but the
exterior of space suit and cooling suit visors will be cooler; they fog up.
The grey dust is dough-pot spores. They are dormant, too warm to reproduce, but are NOT sterile; if
transferred to a suitable environment such as the interior of a spaceship they will come back to life and
start spreading into the air. If inhaled they will grow inside the host and devour him or her in minutes.
They can be destroyed by a few minutes exposure to conditions on the salt flats, but if someone goes
straight from the crawler to the ship without stopping some spores may survive.
The damage to the crawler includes bullet holes and scorch marks (someone panicked, and someone
else tried to hold off the dough-pot with a welding torch), and pitting in the walls and floor, apparently
caused by corrosion. If tested, the pits are acidic. The galley and stores are completely wrecked; anything
edible has long since gone. The same is true of the cabins, the metal bunk frames remain but the bedding
etc. is missing, it has also been eaten.
Most of the life support system is out of action; five vents are still working and blowing cool air, visible
because it disturbs the steam inside the crawler, but the majority are out of action.
If someone opens one of the faulty ducts to check, they will find that there are large holes corroded in
the heat exchanger system.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 131 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

There are small dough-pots surviving behind two of the five working vents; the referee should decide
where they are located. By sheer chance they haven’t yet done enough damage to the heat exchangers to
stop the vents from working. They are roughly the size of footballs, and slowly diminishing in size as they
digest their own bodies. They will “sense” anything living that comes close to them and try to attack it.
Currently most of the interior of
BODY Weapon
Effect
A B
C
the crawler is too hot for the doughSmall
Dough-pot
2-4
Bludgeon
B
ODY
+1
F
I/C
C/K
pots; inside the coolant vents they
Wrestle1
BODY +1
F I
C/K
are in their “comfort zone,” hot
Suffocation 1+1/30 sec I
I
C/K
enough for their metabolisms to
1
The term “wrestle” is used very loosely. Essentially the victim is engulfed.
work sluggishly but not so hot that
Attacks are accompanied by the use of digestive enzymes and infective
they dehydrate. If left undisturbed
spores. Without a Transkin suit they are not survivable, regardless of
duration.
they will eventually die (in another
•
Wearers of space suits can survive for 1-3 minutes before the dough-pot
day or so after the adventurers
acid and spores eat through and infects them.
arrive) and release more spores.
•
Wearers of thermal suits designed for Bright Side conditions are not
Any attempt to cool the interior
defended against spores etc.
of the crawler is thus inviting the
dough-pots to come out to play, and allows the spores on the floor to start to multiply; as they become
active they will eat their neighbours, forming small dough-pots which eat each other until there are several
more small dough-pots loose in the crawler.
It’s likely that the adventurers will encounter the existing dough-pots first, and may kill them before
they become aware of the danger from the spores. Fortunately this isn’t a subtle process; as soon as
conditions inside the crawler get a little cooler the dust will start to churn as the spores attack and
consume each other. It’s readily apparent to anyone watching.
•
•

•

The active dough-pots can be killed by Boland bullets – on a K result they will be blown into
fragments too small to survive, although they will live on as spores.
A flame pistol will kill them instantly, of course, but this will do at least $50,000 worth of damage to
the crawler. It will kill all the spores in the compartment in which it is fired. Don’t expect to get the
crawler working again without shipping expensive parts from Earth, which won’t be possible for
several months. Meanwhile it will be necessary to buy salt from the other colonies and fly it in at
colossal expense.
Firing a flame pistol in the forward compartment is a VERY bad idea – on an 11-12 the flame burns
through one of the atomic blast expansion chambers, and the explosion destroys the crawler. Anyone
inside the forward compartment will die instantly, with the explosion flashing back into the aft
compartment; Effect 12, A:F, B:I, C:C/K.

A better way to get rid of the dough-pots is to use controlled heat against them; turning off the cooling
system completely will kill the active dough pots in a couple of hours. The spores can be destroyed by
any good portable heat source, or anything else that will make them burn well. For example, the
adventurers’ ship will have liquid oxygen in its life support system; pour some of that onto the floor, get
out fast, and throw in a flare, and the spores will burn explosively. Given all of the equipment aboard a
spaceship, it won’t be difficult to come up with a powerful portable heat source and clean out any spores
surviving in odd corners.
The truck has a decontamination spray; there isn’t nearly enough to treat the entire crawler, but it
could be used to get into awkward corners. Alternatively, the adventurers could fly back to Venoble and
pick up a few gallons of the stuff and some spraying equipment, it’s readily available, and use that to
decontaminate the whole crawler.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 132 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

End Game
If the adventurers are cautious it should be possible to get rid of the dough-pots and spores without taking
unnecessary risks. Having done that, the problem of getting the crawler running again needs to be solved.
If the adventurers haven’t made things much worse, they need to deal with the following problems
•
•
•
•
•
•

The front third of the crawler is immersed in a pool of brine, shorting out tread motors etc.
The control cab has been almost completely destroyed.
The life support system is badly damaged.
Food and other supplies have been destroyed.
There’s lots of superficial damage to e.g. the deck, furniture, etc.
The processing equipment (the atomic blasts, expansion chamber, vortex chamber, separator, etc.)
are still in full working order, apart from superficial damage to the control panels etc. However, the
scoop equipment can only get salt to the blasts if the crawler is moving.

Fixing all of these problems is a daunting task; however, the adventurers don’t have to do all of the work.
The first priority is to make things safe, by getting rid of the dough-pots, after that they can try to patch
things up a little. Most importantly, they need to get some processed salt back to Venoble as a stop-gap
until the crawler can be repaired properly, and there’s virtually none aboard; it was being loaded onto
truck 04 when the dough-pot first broke out, was crushed under the treads, and has since blown away.
Encourage the adventurers to think “out of the box” on this one. For example, the processing
equipment can be used if someone comes up with a way to supply the blasts with raw salt, regardless of
whether the crawler is moving or not. There’s a pool of hot saturated brine just outside the front cab, it
shouldn’t take an Einstein to think of pumping brine to the blasts and processing that. Getting this to
work will require Difficulty 5 Mechanic and Scientist (Nuclear physics) skill rolls, but it isn’t new
technology; most power plants on Earth run on sea water. Failed skill rolls just mean the job takes longer.
Hopefully the adventurers will be set up to make some pure salt by the time truck 06 arrives
(assuming that they didn’t delay so long that the crew were killed). Remember that the crew of this truck
have been out of communication for nearly two weeks and have no idea what’s been happening, they
may even assume that the adventurers have attacked the crawler!
Once salt production is resumed the adventurers may think of loading their ship with salt and flying it
back immediately. They probably can’t carry a huge amount, but even a ton or two will keep the power
plants running for several days. Some other things they might think of include:
•
•
•

Flying out drivers to take truck 05 back to Venoble loaded with salt.
Flying out mechanics, engineering components, etc. to make repairs.
Using the rear motors of the crawler and the truck winches to pull the crawler out of the brine pool.

Anything that they try, within reason, should work provided that it isn’t ridiculously over-ambitious. For
example, the crawler weighs so much that it will not be possible to use a spaceship to lift or pull it; any
attempt will probably do serious damage to their ship. No skill roll is required to know this.

Bonus Points
This is a dangerous scenario if the adventurers aren’t reasonably careful:
• Award 2 Bonus Points per adventurer for each truck driver surviving.
• Award 3 Bonus Points per adventurer if at least five tons of salt is delivered to Venoble in the first
week after the crawler is found, 5 points if 10 tons or more is delivered.
• Halve bonus points if the crawler is badly damaged or destroyed by the adventurers’ actions.
• Add individual bonus points for cunning plans, creative use of skills, heroics, making the referee
laugh, and anything else that makes the game more entertaining.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 133 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Smithsonian Institution
Extraterrestrial Biology
Department,
Washington DC
Ceres Expedition – Vacancies
$16200 - $18500 p.a.

The SILGRS (Smithsonian Institution Low-Gravity
Research Submarine) is designed for use in the
interior of asteroids or moons found to contain liquid
water. Since it operates in very low gravity where
ballast tanks would be ineffective, its motion is
controlled entirely by its propellers and fins.
Powered by a sodium-fuelled atomic blast, the
SILGRS has four steerable electric propellers for a
cruising speed of 15-20 KPH; in an emergency the
atomic blast can be run at full power, for estimated
speeds of 30-40 KPH. However, instrumentation and
sonic obstacle detection may be ineffective at higher
speeds, and the steering function of the electric
engines will be impaired. The hull has been rated for
vacuum and for depths to 100 KM within Ceres.
There is accommodation for up to eight occupants
including the pilot, navigator / radio operator and
engineer; oxygen is supplied via electrolysis, with
carbon dioxide and other waste gases vented
automatically, so life support is not a limiting factor.
Scientific equipment includes still and cine cameras,
sampling ports and probes, external thermometers
and other sensors, fixed and movable lights, UV
lights, a refrigerated microscope and refrigerated
specimen storage, etc.
While the SILGRS has not been designed as a
spacecraft, the atomic blast may be used to melt a
route through ice, and it is capable of attaining orbital
velocity from Ceres – these capabilities may be useful
if it is necessary to surface at a point remote from the
base camp. However, there is no landing system and
attitude control in vacuum is VERY limited, the
occupants will have to wait for rescue. This procedure
should only be undertaken in an emergency.

There are vacancies for personnel on the scientific
and support teams for the forthcoming expedition
to Ceres, to be undertaken by the Smithsonian
Institution with the co-operation of the League of
Nations Scientific Council.
The expedition will attempt to explore the
aquatic environment of the asteroid’s water-ice
layer.
Applicants are expected to have a background
in field biology and biochemistry or planetary
geology and geophysics, with an emphasis on subzero marine and/or extraterrestrial environments,
and/or expertise in at least one of the following
areas:
•
•
•
•
•

Deep sea diving using rigid diving suits
Operation of submarines or bathyspheres
Engineering related to the above
Underwater photography
Speleology.

If you are interested in participating please
contact the department with details of your
experience, academic background, etc., an outline
of a research project you would undertake as part
of the exploration of Ceres, and the names of two
referees.1
Successful applicants must be prepared to
submit to rigorous medical and psychological tests
and commit to take part in preliminary training, up
to six months in space, and post-expedition analysis
of results and follow-up after the return to Earth.
The exact time requirement will be determined
once construction and testing of equipment is
complete and transportation has been arranged.
1

Referees may be contacted even if you are not short-listed.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 134 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

A Ceres of Unfortunate Events

C

ERES, the largest asteroid, has always been the
subject of intense scientific speculation. It
ought to be a solid ball of ice, with a thin crust
of meteoric dust, but there is evidence that there is
liquid water under the crust; occasional plumes of ice
crystals as jets of water boil off into space, and seismic
noise that suggests slow internal activity.
Theory suggests that the ice layer is actually a mixture
of ice and supercooled water, with some form of
‘antifreeze’ plus radioactive heat from the solid core
keeping a portion of the ice from freezing. The structure
predicted is a network of interconnected ice tunnels
eroded by convection currents.

The last expedition found such a tunnel under a deep ravine
and ice crevasse. Drilling revealed that it is roughly fifty meters
wide, of indeterminate length, and has slow water currents. The
water contained enough ammonia, which acts as a natural
antifreeze, to stay liquid at -40ºC, plus organic compounds
which deteriorated en route to Earth and could not be
conclusively identified.
This discovery makes it likely that it will be possible to
explore the interior of the asteroid by submarine. Now that it is
certain that there’s liquid water the Smithsonian Institute plans
an expedition to the interior, and the SILGRS (Smithsonian
Institution Low-Gravity Research Submarine) has moved from
the drawing board to a finished vessel in less than a year.
Exploration of the interior is expected to produce a wealth
of information on the formation of the asteroids; if life is
present there may be advances in biology, new pharmaceutical
chemicals, and other sources of knowledge and profit.

The ‘Grand Tour’ Campaign
This expedition easily fits into the ‘Grand
Tour’ campaign described above; the
Smithsonian Institution provides the
equipment, with the League supplying
transport and some of the personnel. This
explains why Endeavour’s crew includes
the Hammonds, who are primarily civilian
explorers. The SILGRS vessel is too big to
be carried by Endeavour, so a team of
engineers is already on the asteroid
preparing the submarine, but too sensible
to use it themselves…
Captain Palmer has experience of
piloting small submarines, making him an
excellent choice to pilot the SILGRS.
Byron Jones is well qualified to operate
the submarine’s power plant, auxiliary
controls and communications systems. He
has used high-pressure rigid space suits.
The Hammonds are both experienced
explorers used to unusual environments
such as the fogs of Uranus and the dark
side of Venus. They made first contact
with the Dark Side natives, the so-called
Lotus Eaters.
For all his faults, Milton Morton is a
competent engineer who can help to
assemble and test the submarine.
Otto Gerber doesn’t have any obvious
part to play in the mission, but he’s a
League official, perfect to observe it and
report back, and has some experience
underwater, though only for sport.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 135 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

The World Ceres (Referees Only)
Ceres isn’t just the home of life; the asteroid itself is alive – a vast and
intelligent organism made mostly of ice which circulates a mixture of
water and other chemicals as its ‘blood’. Its life force is primarily based on
static electricity, not chemistry energy, and an elaborate tunnel structure
behaves somewhat like a Van de Graaff generator. The water travels
through the tunnels by convection, and “bubbles” of a silicon-based liquid
gradually pick up electrostatic charge as they are carried close to the crust
then carry it down to Ceres’ seat of consciousness near the core.
In order to maintain this process it needs various chemicals,
manufactured by thermosynthesis; conversion of infra-red radiation to chemical energy. The source of the
heat for convection and for thermosynthesis is radioactivity in the core. This is a finite heat source, slowly
dwindling as isotopes decay, but Ceres would normally expect to live another two to three million years.
Unfortunately it is currently ill, infected with silicon-based parasites, and will die within the next few
thousand years without help.
Unlike most other intelligent species, Ceres can’t make or build tools; it has some control of its internal
structure, via complex chemical and electro-chemical processes, but can’t manipulate its environment.
The asteroid’s ‘circulation’ is simply water with additives, including specialised ‘cells’ resembling
balloons of various shapes and sizes. Mostly they carry chemicals which store electrostatic charge and
change the viscosity (flow), electrical conductivity, or freezing point of water. It pumps the water around
its body by selectively expanding and contracting tunnels; the ‘cells’ release ammonia and other antifreeze chemicals to make tunnels expand, or other chemicals which neutralise the anti-freeze compounds
to make them start to freeze closed. It thinks by transferring electrostatic charges from one point to
another, mostly deep down towards the core of the asteroid, but its “nervous system” extends
throughout the ice layer, as thin veins of conductive chemicals in the ice.
Ceres has repair mechanisms, evolved to deal with meteor impacts, but they can adapt to deal with
damage from other sources. Its typical way of handling damage is to melt out an area much wider than a
tunnel so that the crust collapses to plug the hole with debris, freeze it again, and wait a few years before
tunnelling in that direction again. If necessary it can pump water to blow an “irritant” out onto the
surface – occasional geysers are this process at work, used to expel meteors or accumulated toxic
chemicals. All of this works slowly, but fast enough to cause problems for explorers. Unfortunately none
of this helps against its silicon invaders.
While these physiological and mental processes are slow by the standards of human thought, its
“brain” is vast and thousands of millions of electrostatic transfers occur simultaneously, so that Ceres can
simultaneously examine every possible aspect of a problem and come up with an optimum solution. It
might take hours to process an idea, but it usually ends up with the right answer.
It senses the outside world via very long wave radio, gravity waves, various subatomic particles, and (at
really close range) the electrical impulses other species use for thought.
Ceres is aware that there are other intelligent beings in the universe. Over the last few million years it
has detected gravity wave and ultra long-wave radio signals several times, and replied with signals of its
own. Most recently (as it thinks of it), just fifteen thousand years ago, it was visited by a Martian
spaceship, and acquired several interesting ideas from the Thoth. It’s only just beginning to notice the
existence of humanity. Just “moments” ago it detected some radio signals (Marconi’s 1901-1903
transatlantic trials) which it thinks might be evidence of another species out there.
The aim of this adventure is for the adventurers to make peaceful contact with Ceres, hopefully help it
with its illness, and survive the experience. It won’t be entirely straightforward...

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 136 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Troubleshooting
What if the adventurers simply aren’t interested in advancing science? Here are some alternative
motivators for use with different teams or types of character, which will need some work by the referee:
Profit: It’s a new world, and new worlds usually mean new discoveries. What if there’s something inside
Ceres as valuable as Titan flame gems, or as Venusian Xixtchil? Or worthwhile amounts of gold,
radium, or any of a dozen other valuable minerals? Instead of a primarily scientific mission, the aim is
to make a fast buck; get inside, find out what’s there, and if it’s valuable bring enough back to make a
killing, but not so much that people assume it isn’t valuable. The adventurers are looking for new
drugs, gems, exciting native art work, etc. This can also be a motive for individual members of a
science team, of course, with characters planning to smuggle back their finds to sell, rather than
treating them as scientific specimens.
Hiding Out: The adventurers are pirates, or some other type of fugitives, looking for a long-term hiding
place; perhaps they’re working with Red Peri (or hiding from her), perhaps they’re on the run from an
oppressive government, false accusations, etc. Somehow they get hold of the SILGRS craft, and it
suggests the possibility of finding a really obscure hiding place.
Stop The Presses: The adventurers are a news team, sent independently to Ceres to film and photograph
the first expedition into the interior, try to find a way to be aboard during the maiden trip of the
SILGRS craft, etc. They are not at all welcomed by the serious scientists. Or are the scientists up to
something, and worried about being exposed?
Salvage: The adventurers discover the SILGRS craft orbiting Ceres, empty. The base camp used by the
expedition is also empty or simply can’t be found. There are no clues to the fate of the missing
scientists… unless the adventurers want to go looking for them.
Mirror, Mirror: The year is 2145, not 2115, and the adventurers are natives of the less advanced
version of this universe described in the scenario outline Time-Slip on Titan, but of course don’t know
that there is more than one universe.
There never was a Smithsonian Institution expedition to Ceres, submarine technology isn’t up to it
yet, and the SILGRS is found in some extremely unlikely place; in the Arizona desert, on top of
Mount Everest, on Phobos, or wherever seems likely to get the team’s attention. There are several
space-suit clad skeletons inside, and all of the control labels, papers, etc. inside are written in mirror
writing. Even the screws are threaded the wrong way, and the molecules in the skeletons (and other
organic materials) are isomers, mirror-reversed versions of the normal material. Maybe there are clues
in the papers, but deciphering mirror-reversed scrawls isn’t easy, and they mention weird things like
the League of Nations and the Russian Empire continuing into the 22nd century, surviving intelligent
life on Mars, a version of Venus that has swamps instead of seas, and other anomalies.
Clues should gradually lead the adventurers to some sort of time portal, inside Ceres, and the
possibility of trading with a different and in some ways more advanced universe.
Murder Most Foul: This works best as a motive for an individual character who is a newcomer to the
group; for some reason the newcomer wants to kill another character, but doesn’t catch up with him
(or her)_before the team leaves for Ceres. The goal here is to commit murder and get away with it;
some sort of accident inside Ceres seems the best bet, but arranging it won’t be easy.
Betting On Success: Another motive for an individual character; the Ceres expedition has aroused a lot of
interest and a lot of money is riding on its success – or its failure. Unfortunately the adventurer has
run into a ‘small’ financial problem with his bookie, and received an ultimatum; if any truly intelligent
life is found the bookie will be ruined, but intends to make sure that the adventurer goes down with
him. If intelligent life is found it must be reported as ‘pseudo-intelligent,’ like the Slinkers of Io,
regardless of the facts.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 137 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Training Montage
If you’re using the sample characters they’re already working as a team. Nevertheless, a mission of this
importance needs preparation. This can mostly happen off-stage, or can just be mentioned as having
happened without many details. The main elements are:
•

•

•

Pilots and engineers learn to operate the SILGRS – since the training is run on Earth rather than in
low gravity it can’t be completely accurate. The training program uses a mock-up of the submarine in
motorised gimbals, rigged to respond as much like the real thing as possible. For example, if the
propellers aren’t aligned properly it will start to rotate around its mid-point or tumble end over end.
Another mock-up is designed for submerged training, lowered into a deep water tank. The trainees
can practice operating the sampling equipment, using the air lock for divers, etc. It doesn’t have
working propulsion systems, but everything else apart from gravity is as realistic as possible.
There’s also a good deal of theoretical training on the science side, with an emphasis on ice
formation, hydrology (water flow), low-temperature chemical analysis, etc.

If this is played out in any detail there should always be a sense of urgency, with the “window” for a fast
flight to Ceres closing in fast, and the SILGRS initially under construction, later under tests (and running
into endless teething problems), and finally available for some training sessions only days before it must be
prepared for shipment to Ceres. It’s very sluggish under Earth conditions; the best speed is 5 KPH with
the electric engines, 18 KPH with the atomic blast. In Ceres it should be considerably faster. The
summary of its performance above is mostly based on calculations and to some extent educated guesses;
the reality is below.

The SILGRS in Depth
The most obvious external features of the SILGRS vessel are the steerable propellers and control fins (A)
and the atomic blast (B).
The interior is cramped, with little head room in most areas. The pilot (a) has the forward seat. The
seats immediately behind him (b) can be used for observers and the scientific team. Behind them are the
engineering, communications, and navigation equipment (c) and science equipment (d), including still and
cine cameras, sampling ports for collecting specimens from the water, a refrigerated microscope, and
refrigerated storage for specimens. There are two deep-water pressure suits (e), all crew will have space
suits. The air lock (f) incorporates
UV lights and anti-bacterial sprays,
and a gas absorption system to
remove
ammonia.
The
rear
compartments include a store room
with galley facilities (g) and a small
washroom
(h).
The
engine
compartment contains the atomic
blast (i) and tanks of concentrated
brine (j) to fuel it. For safety reasons
the compartment can’t be entered
while the vessel is submerged. Life
support equipment is under the deck
and in overhead ducts etc.,
contributing to the lack of headroom.
A PDF version of this plan sized for 25mm / 28mm figures can be downloaded from the author’s web site

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 138 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

The hull is made of titanium steel with clear synthetic quartz viewports. The engineers who designed
the ship estimated that it would be able to withstand pressure to depths of approximately 120 KM below
the surface of Ceres, but red-lined the depth gauges at 100 KM as a safety precaution. In fact the hull is
stronger than anticipated, and won’t show signs of strains until it reaches a depth of 140 KM. At this
point water starts to leak in around the windows and the sampling ports, the hull groans, the engine
compartment starts to flood, and if they ignores it and continue to dive they will eventually die. The ice
layer is nearly 200 KM thick, and the sub will implode long before it reaches the core. The hull is also
rated safe for use in vacuum. In game terms it’s BODY 30, ARMOUR -5
The deep-water pressure suits are rated to 50 KM depth inside Ceres, BODY 10, ARMOUR -3. Normal
spacesuits will work down to about 1 KM, but the radios will be damaged by any immersion. At greater
depths the external pressure makes it impossible for the wearer to breathe.
The submarine is unarmed; the nearest approximation to weapons are two
harpoon-like anchors on 75-metre cables, which fire to the left and right
forward of the submarine. The cables are strong enough to anchor the
submarine against currents up to 10-15 KPH. The harpoons are designed to
embed deeply into ice, like pitons, and incorporate electrical heaters which can
be used to free them by melting the ice around them. They can then be
retracted for reuse. They’re not nearly accurate enough to be used as
weapons, but if anything is unlucky enough to be hit they have EFFECT 12, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
The light cluster at the front of the submarine includes red, white, and ultra-violet lamps, all with
variable brightness. Dim red light is felt to be the least threatening if timid life forms are found, white is
probably best for general-purpose illumination, and ultra-violet may reveal hidden details such as
transparent plankton etc. There are two more portable lights in the science section, which can be moved
to any of the ports. They have rubber shields around the lens so that they be pressed against the glass to
illuminate the exterior of the submarine without light reflecting back inside.
Navigation and communications equipment includes SONAR, a gyroscopic inertial navigation device,
and an ultra-low frequency radio which should be able to communicate through the ice at short range.
The specifications supplied to the team are mostly accurate, but there are some errors and omissions.
Most notably, while the speed running on electric motors was correctly estimated at up to 20 KPH, speed
using the atomic blast was wildly under-estimated at 30-40 KPH; the calculation didn’t make enough
allowance for the expansion of steam behind the sub. The minimum speed on the blast is 40 KPH at the
lowest power setting; at full power the speed can exceed 60 KPH. But even at 40 KPH the handling is
lousy (+3 to Pilot Difficulty), the sonar is useless, and there isn’t time to steer away from anything
revealed by the lights before over-running it.
There is also a flaw in the emergency escape system. This assumes that if the submarine gets lost or
trapped it may escape from the ice miles from the base camp, and should then use the main engine to go
into orbit around the asteroid, so that it can be found easily. Even ignoring the problems likely to arise in
trying to find another route to the surface, there’s a basic flaw in the idea; the SILGRS life support system
uses electrolysis to generate oxygen from water, and the main source of water will be gone once the
SILGRS is in space. There’s enough drinking water aboard to keep the air fresh for a few hours, and the
adventurers should have air for several hours in their space suits. After that everyone suffocates.
If the players read through the description and think about this they should spot the flaw, and the
characters may want to make changes before the expedition begins. If so, an additional four day supply of
air can be added without major structural changes. Adding more requires serious modifications and will
delay the expedition past the best launch date. The tanks etc. needed to add the four day supply can also
be installed on arrival at Ceres, but installing them will take two days.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 139 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Base Camp
Ceres base camp consists of three domes, set up by
the previous expedition, a few hundred yards from
the crevasse where the ice tunnel was found. A
landing pad has been cleared and levelled, and
landing poles and lights have been installed to guide
ships to a safe touchdown – it’s actually a little too
close to the domes for safety, but so far there
haven’t been problems.
Pilots landing at this site must make a Difficulty 4 skill roll; on
11-12 the ship drifts out of the landing area. Roll 2D6 for
direction (as on a clock face, e.g. 6 is south), and 2D6-1 for
distance in multiples of 50 yards, e.g. roll 11-1 = 500 yards.
On a result of 9 for direction and 8 (400 yards) for distance
the ship comes down directly above the domes, and another
Pilot roll, Difficulty 8, must be made to sheer off. If that roll
also fails the domes are damaged, requiring several hours
repair; on a 12 the ship actually lands on top of one of the
domes, destroying it. If anyone is killed the pilot can expect to
be charged with gross negligence.

The domes contain basic accommodation, a workshop, and a laboratory, and can accommodate up to
twelve persons without overloading the life support system. Equipment includes a drill for taking ice
samples to a depth of several hundred metres, and two vehicles, small caterpillar-tracked “trucks” holding
up to four persons plus several tons of cargo. They are fitted with extendable cranes, bulldozer blades,
winches, and ground anchors. In Ceres’ low gravity they are a little too fast; it’s easy to drive over a rise
and find that a truck flies ten or twenty yards before landing.
Anything over 20 KPH is probably too fast; the first time this happens the driver should roll against Difficulty 5, on
a failure the truck rocks violently on landing but isn’t harmed. On a 12 a track pin shears, and one of the tracks
comes off, an annoying repair which takes 30-45 minutes. After two or three successful rolls it becomes instinct to
take rises slowly, and no more rolls need be made.

At this point the outer crust of Ceres is unusually thin,
just a few hundred feet, and a ravine has opened revealing
the underlying ice, with a deep vertical crevasse in the floor
of the widest part of the ravine. The ravine appears to be
several hundred thousand years old, and there have been
land-slips on the south side, so that there is a relatively
gentle slope. The crevasse appears to be very recent in
geological terms, and probably hasn’t been open more than
300-400 years. The ice tunnel runs within a few feet of the crevasse floor; the ice isn’t completely clear,
but at the closest point the tunnel is visible as a slightly darker blue-grey shadow below the surface.
The floor of the crevasse is level. Mention this but don’t explain it unless the players ask; on a
Difficulty 4 Science roll it’s apparent that at some time in the past the bottom of the crevasse filled with
water, which then froze. One possible explanation is that the crevasse was originally deeper and filled
from the tunnel. If analysed, the ice is almost pure water, with very little dissolved ammonia. The most
likely hypothesis is that the ammonia evaporated in vacuum, leaving the water to freeze.
The submarine will be shipped out by freighter with its control fins and propellers removed (to reduce
its diameter). If you’re using the ‘Grand Tour’ campaign it’s too big to fit inside Endeavour; the

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 140 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

adventurers travel separately and arrive a couple of days before the sub. Hopefully the captain will think
of moving Endeavour well clear of the landing pad before a clumsy freighter arrives! Final assembly of the
submarine takes three days, five if the extra air tanks mentioned above are added on-site.
• If the adventurers flew out separately from the SILGRS, the freighter that delivers the SILGRS will
stay on Ceres for the duration of the mission, with its crew providing support and ready to rescue the
submarine if it surfaces elsewhere on the asteroid or has to escape into space.
• If the adventurers flew the SILGRS out in their own ship, there should be some NPC support
personnel already in place at the base, including at least one NPC pilot qualified to fly their ship.
The previous expedition bulldozed a track down the south side of the ravine, with the intention of
transporting the submarine to the ravine and lowering it down the crevasse by crane. Once it’s down the
ice can be smashed (using jack hammers and pick axes) and the submarine can be lowered into the water
for launching. Then the crew can board and begin their unusual voyage.

Ice Palace
In play tests the adventurers usually began very cautiously, with the
submarine tethered to a winch in case the current was too powerful for
the engines, and made equipment tests before venturing far from the
opening. Encourage this – it gives players the illusion that they’re in
control and maybe this time things aren’t going to go wrong…
Once the adventurers are sure that the submarine isn’t sinking or
flooding they will probably want to look round. Encourage them to try
the lights, SONAR, radio, etc.
The tunnel is about fifty meters wide, but the structure is much more complicated than might be
expected; a succession of evenly-spaced “buttresses” of ice cross the tunnel at intervals of about 150
meters, restricting the main bore to about twenty meters at any given point. There’s room for the sub,
but it’s a close fit. They have a rounded “sculpted” look. On a Science roll (+2 bonus for any speciality
related to fluid dynamics, hydraulics, etc.) this will be recognised as the result of thousands of years of
turbulence; as water flows along the tunnel there are eddies and swirls, which wear away some ice while
leaving it behind elsewhere. A similar process produces sand dunes. The water flows at about 4 KPH.
In white light the water looks completely clear, and there are no signs
of anything resembling life. The same is true in red light, but ultra-violet
reveals a world of wonders. There are thousands of luminous balls, from
the size of marbles to balloons, glowing in different colours, drifting with
the current. Mostly they’re clear, only visible because their edges glow,
but some are red, blue, or gold. They don’t seem to react to the light or
SONAR. They’ll disintegrate if sucked into the propellers, and they are
impossible to avoid, there are just too many of them.
The balls contain water plus one or another of the chemicals that regulate Ceres’ internal processes,
inside a molecule-thick membrane that keeps the liquid together until needed. They’re too big to be taken
aboard intact through the sampling tubes, but there’s equipment for taking liquid samples, which will
work if it’s used when a ball is by the end of the nozzle. There are four main types:
• Clear balls are water with higher than normal amounts of ammonia. They burst if they drift into water
containing much less than the usual amount of ammonia.
• Red balls contain a chemical which forms sticky strands of gel when it reacts with ammonia. This
decreases the amount of ammonia in the water, encouraging it to freeze, and also decreases flow rate.
It’s mostly important if Ceres is damaged; it stops water flowing out and makes it freeze, plugging the
hole. The gel won’t have much direct effect on the submarine – it’s about as strong as dilute
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 141 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

•

•

wallpaper paste – but it could encourage ice to form on the propellers, or impede a diver. The
chemical hasn’t been described before, because it breaks down at about -20ºC or when the water it’s
in freezes, but it’s readily synthesised once known. It could be useful in some industrial processes, but
it would be cheaper to make it on Earth than import it from Ceres.
Gold balls contain a chemical that reduces turbulence to speed water flow. They’re comparatively
rare near the surface because Ceres actually needs turbulence in its upper tunnels, it encourages
electron transfers. Mostly they’re found in the broad vertical ‘arteries’ and ‘veins’.
Blue balls contain a silicon-based chemical which easily picks up electrostatic charges, with an outer
insulating layer. They’re equivalent to red blood cells, carrying charge in the same way that red blood
cells carry oxygen. Mostly the charge is taken down to the centre of consciousness near the core, far
below the maximum depth attainable by the SILGRS, but some is released nearer the surface.

The spheres are the equivalent of red cells, platelets, etc., but function by simple chemical processes.
They can easily be mistaken for living organisms, but don’t contain any of the mechanisms needed for
reproduction etc. There are many other types, serving more specialised purposes, but they mostly look
much like one or another of the above, and all of the other types are comparatively rare.
Soon some golf-ball sized spheres appear and start to engulf the smaller
blue balls. These are the parasites that have invaded Ceres, as spores carried
on a meteor that hit Ceres a few hundred years ago. They are living
organisms in their own right, based on silicon, and use the stored electrostatic
and chemical energy of the blue spheres to power their own metabolism.
Without any natural predators, and with plenty of food available, they are
rapidly growing in numbers and depriving Ceres of the energy it uses to
power its thought processes. Ceres is aware of the problem, but hasn’t been
able to identify the cause or think of a way to get rid of them. They are
visible without UV light.
One of them approaches a balloon-sized blue sphere and somehow gets
inside then rapidly splits into several smaller organisms. They explode out,
leaving the blue sphere disintegrating behind them, then swim towards smaller
blue spheres to attack them. Others start to cluster on the synthetic quartz
viewports, revealing sharp-toothed maws that scrape at the windows. It will
take hundreds of hours for them to do enough damage to endanger the
SILGRS, but don’t tell the players that.
If the spheres are examined under a microscope it can be seen that the
outer surfaces have tiny silicon whiskers, which propel them through the
water. If they are touched they will do their best to bite, even though they have no use for human flesh.
They are a real danger to anyone wearing a non-armoured space suit in the water, attacking the silicon
rubber and Silicelu visors in swarms:
Silicon Eater: BODY 1, MIND –, SOUL –, Brawling 2, Bite Effect 2, A: F, B: F, C:I
Attack in swarms of 1D6+2. If attacking a space suit, on a natural 2 to hit, then I for damage, they penetrate the
suit. Visors shatter, air leaks out or water leaks in if they damage other parts of the suit. They cannot do significant
damage to armoured suits.

If the SONAR is used all of the silicon eaters in view disintegrate, shaken apart by the blast. This
shouldn’t be over-emphasised immediately, especially if the adventurers have no idea that the silicon
eaters are intruders. If possible try to make them feel guilty about the destruction!
The last thing to appear is a wriggling form that looks vaguely like an enormously elongated sausage
balloon, about thirty feet long and six inches wide, but moves through the water like a worm or an eel.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 142 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

It’s semi-transparent and there are no
obvious internal organs, under UV light it
glows red. Like the transparent spheres, it
seems to ignore the submarine. This is a
scavenger, which is also part of the Ceres
organism; it absorbs metal ions and other
chemicals that might harm Ceres. It’s
animated by chemical processes, but it
would be natural to assume that it’s alive. The ‘worms’ are harmless, but they’ll move towards anything
that releases metal ions; the exterior of the submarine is coated with plastic to reduce corrosion, but the
rigid diving suits are not. Anyone seeing one will probably assume that it’s another predator. These are
made of soft gel resembling the mucus in frog spawn, but tinted different colours according to their diet;
one that has absorbed a lot of iron ions will be red, copper gives a blue-green tinge, and so forth. Some
have stripes of different colours. Despite these tints there isn’t much metal in them, and attempts to
process them for their chemicals will be uneconomic.
Once the adventurers have had a look
around they’ll probably want to start
exploring. Cautious characters will probably
want to go upstream, against the current, so
that they can be sure that they’ll be able to get
back again. If so, they can travel about 3 KM
before the tunnel branches into three narrower
tunnels; each of the branches is only just wide
enough for the submarine. The next branch of
the tunnel is too narrow for the submarine
(shown in red). If a diver tries to go further
there are eventually more divisions, and the tunnel is soon too narrow for even a standard space suit
(shown in blue). Remember that diving in an armoured suit takes a lot of effort; it’s heavy and awkward
even in low gravity, while a spacesuit wearer will lose contact with the submarine as his radio fails, and will
be subject to attacks by the silicon eaters.
Going in the other direction, the opening is about 2 KM from a fork where three similarly sized
tunnels meet; after the fork the tunnel is about 60 meters wide and the current has increased to 6 KPH.
The depth slowly increases. After the next fork the tunnel is wider still, and the flow is about 8 KPH. And
after another 1 KM the tunnel, and many others, enter a near-vertical shaft, several hundred meters wide,
with a strong current downwards at about 12 KPH. The opening is close to the top of the shaft, and
several other tunnels enter it from different angles, all of them with a flow of water into the shaft. This
point is already below the crush depth for ordinary space suits.
Cautious adventurers will probably be VERY careful about this; another increase in speed could make
it impossible to get to their entry point using the electric motors alone, and the atomic blast is still
untested. If anyone worries about marking the tunnel, remind them that the inertial navigation system
should easily find the route back; alternatively, some sort of marker could be added to the tunnel
entrance, by (for example) going out in a diving suit and fixing a piece of cloth to the ice.
If they try another of the horizontal tunnels they’ll find that it’s nearly identical to the one they’ve
come from, a series of branching tunnels getting narrower the further they go. There is no visible route to
the surface. Because of the strong downward current it’s difficult to get from one tunnel to another; no
skill rolls are needed, it just takes a long time because most of the engine power is being used to counter
the current.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 143 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

By the time the SILGRS reaches the vertical shaft their original entrance will be closing. The red balls
have done their job, and sticky gel has closed off the opening and encouraged ice to start forming. After
an hour or so there will be half a meter of ice on the surface, after five or six hours the whole tunnel is
obstructed by ice, spreading in both directions for fifty meters or so.
If the adventurers have left someone at their base camp (possibly NPCs) it can be assumed that they
will attempt to communicate, and try to keep the water from freezing. But the more the ice is disturbed
the more ammonia will evaporate from the water, and the faster it will freeze. Surprisingly, signals will still
get through to the sub; Ceres incorporates salt ice structures equivalent to low-frequency antennae, and
they’ll serve to relay the signals. By using these frequencies the adventurers alert Ceres to their presence,
of course, but it will be slow to respond. Keep track of how often they use the radio to determine this;
for every time they use the radio roll 2D6, less the number of radio messages. On a modified result of
zero or less Ceres begins to respond, as described in the section S… S… S… below.
At this point cautious characters may choose to head back to their original tunnel, get as close as they
can to the insertion point, then use the atomic blast to melt the ice. This works, if they (a) anchor the sub
with both anchors and (b) run the propellers on full reverse. If only the anchors are used they rip free,
and the sub suddenly blasts forward at 40 KPH. If only the propellers are used, the sub goes forward at a
minimum of 20 KPH, with very little control. The pilot needs to keep making skill rolls at Difficulty 8 at
40 KPH, Difficulty 6 at 20 KPH, until the atomic blast is cut.
• If the roll is a success all collisions are avoided. The sub goes forward, of course, which may not be
what was planned. Reduce the Difficulty of the next roll -1, to a minimum of Difficulty 3.
• If any roll is a failure the sub hits the ice hard enough to shake everyone, but doesn’t take real
damage. However, each impact throws the sub off balance and makes it harder to control. Raise
Difficulty +1.
• On a 12 one of the propellers is damaged, and all control is lost. The sub crashes into the ice and the
engines start to drive it in, until the power is cut. There are spares in the store room, but fixing this
will require someone to venture out and replace the propeller, which requires a Difficulty 5 Mechanic
or Science (Engineer) skill roll.
If the adventurers do everything right they should be able to get back to the original insertion point, and
the sub can be retrieved (if it’s left in the water it will be frozen in place within a few hours). If that
happens further developments must await their next expedition into the interior of the asteroid.

Dive, Dive, Dive
The mission is planned to spend several weeks on and in Ceres, and is expected to produce some results.
Eventually the adventurers will probably risk going deeper into the asteroid; if they don’t, they won’t
learn much more about it, and the expedition’s sponsors will not be happy.
Troubleshooting: If adventurers refuse to have anything more to do with the SILGRS or the interior of Ceres,
remind them that their careers, academic standing, reputations etc. are linked to the success of the expedition. If
there’s a difference of opinion, anyone who doesn’t want to go into the asteroid again could remain on the surface
helping to man the base camp, but there isn’t much to do and they’ll get no glory. If nobody wants to go back
inside there are flight plans prepared for the return to Earth, but all of them will require them to wait on Ceres for
weeks to months before returning. If anyone has trained as an astrogator they can plot an entirely new plan and
return earlier, of course. Explaining this to e.g. the Smithsonian or the League Science Council won’t be easy.

The next stage of the journey is the shaft down; this has the same corrugated look as the tunnels (the
word “organic” should not be used at this point) but is of course much wider. It’s tilted about five
degrees from the vertical. There are the same ice buttresses criss-crossing the shaft every few hundred
metres.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 144 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

After fifteen kilometres several shafts enter the top of an egg-shaped chamber,
roughly ten kilometres in diameter and thirty kilometres deep, with tens of thousands
of needle-like icicles, each about thirty metres long, protruding from its walls. They’re
covered with a silicon-based insulator similar to the coating of the blue spheres. A
central pillar about two hundred metres wide, covered in longer icicles, runs up its
central axis. This is a major nexus in which the silicon charge-carrier spheres shed and
take on static electricity. Bands of blue light move up and down the sides of the
chamber and the central column, each made of hundreds of spikes glowing as they
shed or gain charges simultaneously. If the SILGRS touches the spikes it will be hit by
occasional static charges; they’re harmless, since the hull of the submarine is a good
Faraday cage, but disconcerting. Anyone touching the metal instruments that protrude
through the hull, such as the sampling probes, will feel a distinct tingle of electricity.
The spike material is coated ice contaminated with salt and trace elements of other
electrical conductors. Veins of this material run back into the walls of the chamber.
Anyone going outside in a diving suit and touching one of these icicles will feel a distinct tingle of
electricity, but it’s harmless; the suits are too heavily insulated for a dangerous shock. Optionally this
initiates the process of mental contact described in the next section.
Part of one side of the chamber is dark, in an irregular dark splodge about 200 metres wide and 500
metres long. If this is checked tens of thousands of the golf-ball sized silicon eaters will be found,
swimming around the spikes and eating the blue charge-carrying spheres. The spikes in this region look
damaged; the specialised chemical packets that should repair them are being eaten. The infestation is
slowly expanding. Here, as elsewhere, if the adventurers use their sonar the silicon eaters will disintegrate.
This is only the first of these chambers; if they go deeper they will encounter another at a depth of 30
kilometres, the next at 43 kilometres. All of them show the same pulsing blue patterns, and have sections
which seem to be damaged by the silicon eaters.
By now the adventurers will hopefully have the idea that there is some sort of organizing process
responsible for these phenomena, and may guess that the silicon eaters are disrupting things. Soon they
will have proof.

S… S… S…
Ceres “recently” noticed the existence of humanity when it detected a repeated radio signal, a pattern of
three pulses, originating much nearer the Sun. This was actually Marconi’s first transatlantic radio signal of
1901. Almost “instantly” it detected more signals, of ever-increasing complexity, and began to memorise
them for later analysis. 214 years later it has identified the separate letters etc. of Morse code, but is no
closer to understanding what they mean. It assumes that SSS is a greeting.
After it has picked up enough radio messages, as described above, or at a moment convenient to the
referee, Ceres will attempt to contact the adventurers by radio. This should occur when they are in one
of the chambers described above.
The message consists simply of the letters SSS followed by a repeat of one or another of their previous
messages. It’s accompanied by waves of blue light moving up the chamber walls in time with their signal.
After each repetition the pattern changes to concentric waves of light, converging to a point on one of
the chamber walls. The adventurers may be forgiven for assuming that somehow they have been noticed;
in fact this is happening in all of these chambers throughout the asteroid.
If the submarine approaches the point where the lights converge they will find an unusually
complicated arrangement of ice branches, which on a Difficulty 5 Science roll (or any other appropriate
skill roll) will be recognised as an array of ultra-short-wave antennae, focused on a point about fifty
metres from the chamber wall. These are capable of picking up the electrical signals associated with
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 145 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

human (and Martian) thought. As soon as the submarine approaches within a few metres of the focus of
the antennae they will begin to relay everyone’s thoughts to Ceres. It doesn’t understand them at first, but
it can start to process them and look for patterns it recognises, most notably Morse code, and use that to
unlock words and their meanings. It repeatedly transmits the messages it has heard, analyses the thought
patterns they trigger, and uses them to decode human language. This process begins as soon as the
submarine goes anywhere near the antennas, completing in about forty-five minutes; halve this time if the
submarine stays at the focus throughout this period.
Troubleshooting: If the submarine stays away from the focus this process takes several hours – Ceres has a poorer
record of their thoughts – but the results are the same.

Once Ceres has learned a little English it can start to try to communicate. Remember that Ceres has no
experience of human life, or understanding of human emotions. It’s logical and strange, with the emphasis
on strangeness.
It’s impossible to predict every question that may be asked once the adventurers realise that they are
in contact with something alien. Here are a few possibilities:
Q: Who are you?
A: “I am.” If some expansion is requested, Ceres will respond “I am the whole.” Only gradually reveal that it
means that it is the whole asteroid.
Q: What do you want?
A: “Want?” It doesn’t really understand the idea of wanting things; as far as it is concerned, situations either
“are” or “are not,” there is little that can be done to change them. This might be changed if the
adventurers suggest that they may be able to help destroy the silicon eaters, once they explain what the
silicon eaters are; Ceres knows that something has been disrupting its internal processes, but has no real
idea of the cause.
Q: What do you eat?
A: “Eat?” Ceres has no idea of eating, food, etc., but it can describe its electrical life-style and circulation in
great detail. This should include mentioning that something is disrupting its internal processes.
Q: Where do the tunnels go?
A: “Down” The adventurers are in a section of Ceres’ circulation, an “artery” that leads inexorably
downwards to the core, far below the sub’s crush depth. They can get back to the surface slowly by
travelling against the current. However, there are occasional “capillaries” connecting the downward and
upward channels, used to speed the movement of chemicals and waste. They’re wide enough for the
submarine if the pilot is careful, and can be melted a little wider with the main engine if necessary.
Q: Is there anything valuable here?
A: “Define valuable.” It has absolutely no idea. There are undoubtedly rare minerals in the core, and in the
concentrated toxic waste it is occasionally forced to expel, but it has no idea what would be useful to
humans, and no easy way to get materials to the surface. The concept of exchanging valuables or services
is totally outside its experience.
• An exchange or gift of information is more familiar to it; it has previous experience with the Martians
of 15,000 BC, who told it much that it will find very difficult to explain.
• It can “play back” speeded-up recordings of the signals it has received from sources outside the solar
system, ultra-long-wave radio and gravity wave messages which were received over thousands of years.
It doesn’t understand them, but perhaps humans will be interested.
• If presented with a complex mathematical problem, no matter its nature, it can probably solve it; it
may take weeks to decades, but eventually it will find some sort of answer. It will know if a question is
meaningless or unanswerable. It will be happy to tackle problems, they make life more interesting.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 146 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Q: Is it possible to destroy the silicon eaters?
A: Ceres doesn’t know. It hasn’t considered the idea, since it has little direct control of its internal processes.
Humans may have other ideas.
• The simplest solution appears to be to zap the silicon eaters with ultrasonic sound, which makes them
disintegrate. There are a few problems with this idea – the most obvious is that the SILGRS sonar
only destroys silicon eaters within fifty metres or so, and there are tens of thousands of kilometres of
tunnels. Additionally, destroying the silicon eaters does not destroy their spores, which are tough
enough to withstand vacuum and impacts at several kilometres a second. If anything it spreads them
much faster than they would spread by themselves, since thousands are released for every eater that
shatters! At first Ceres will feel temporary relief, but within a year or so the problem will be worse
than ever, and much harder to cure.
• A better answer might seem to be something that attacks the silicon eaters chemically or biologically,
if it doesn’t simultaneously harm Ceres. The problem is the sheer size of Ceres; tens of thousands of
tons of chemicals would be needed to make any significant change to the chemistry of the water, and
all of its processes have evolved to maintain the status quo. They would be working to counteract any
changes that were made.
• While there are organisms that could live under the conditions inside Ceres in the seas of Ganymede,
none are particularly likely to want to eat the silicon eaters, and they would most likely be just as big a
threat to the status quo as the silicon eaters themselves.
• The best answer can be found in the basic building blocks of their bodies, the silicon structures which
function as cells. High power sound waves shake them apart, but they survive as spores. Radio waves
of exactly the right frequency shatter the spores themselves, reducing them to harmless flecks of
silicon oxide. This takes a lot of power, but Ceres has plenty to spare. Once a suitable frequency has
been found it can “listen” to it and start to transmit it throughout its body, destroying the silicon
eaters in a few hours. This will also damage electrical equipment if the SILGRS is inside Ceres, so it’s
probably best to wait it out. Realistically, this cure is most likely to be found as the result of a
prolonged research project, long after the adventurers leave Ceres, but if the characters spend a lot of
time on research and experiment on the silicon eaters, and it’s made clear that they’re trying a variety
of approaches to the problem, a kind referee may let them come up with it while they’re still on
Ceres. By doing so they will earn the gratitude of a minor planet, which ought to be good for their
careers!
Q: How do we get out of here?
A: This is most likely to be asked if the adventurers have lost track of the route back to the surface, or an
unkind referee has chosen to close the tunnels. Ceres doesn’t know exactly where they are; basically,
they’re somewhere inside its peripheral nervous system, but that could be anywhere in more than a
hundred million cubic kilometres of ice. If it’s asked to come up with a better answer it can locate them
by radio – but it doesn’t have any detailed knowledge of the upper tunnels, that would be like asking
someone to describe the precise layout of the capillaries in their skin. Tunnels are formed as they are
needed, to maintain a steady supply of energy to the central core. Occasionally there are breaks in the
surface; some are cracks, as in the crevasse that the adventurers used to enter Ceres, others are similar to
geysers, triggered by unusual accumulations of toxic waste. There are occasional ice-filled shafts leading
through the crust to the outer surface; autonomic processes concentrate the toxic waste in “cysts” then
melt the ice and blast the material out onto the crust. This is rare, but by chance will be happening in
about twenty hours; Ceres can feel a cyst forming in their approximate area. The adventurers may be able
to get to it in time by following toxic waste carriers, the wormlike structures described above.
The next section assumes that this is how the adventurers get out.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 147 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Upwards and Outwards
Assuming that the adventurers haven’t taken immense trouble to secure an escape route, the original
entrance they used may now be closed off by several kilotons of ice. It might be possible to melt their
way back to the crevasse, but doing so will put an enormous strain on the SILGRs, especially on the
propulsion systems and anchors. Finding an alternative route may seem a better option, especially if you
ask for a lot of skill rolls and describe a disappointing amount of progress and more damage with every
failure.
The first step towards finding an escape route is to find a cross-shaft that leads in the direction of the
correct upward-bound shaft. There are lots of them, about one per kilometre of vertical shaft, but most
lead to the wrong shaft. The entrances are below
the bases of some of the broad ice buttresses that
cross the vertical shafts. In the upward-flowing shafts
they’re above the buttresses. This makes them easy
to overlook if you’re travelling in the direction in
which the current is flowing. The right one can be
identified because dozens of the coloured “worms”
are moving towards it, some swimming against the
current to reach the entrance. UV light is needed to
see this, of course.
If the adventurers follow them they’ll find that
the tunnel is just about navigable, although the steering fins will scrape against the ice occasionally. This
won’t do more than cosmetic damage unless the pilot rolls a 12 – if this happens a propeller blade
replacement is needed, as described above.
In the next shaft there are a lot more of the “worms”, but it isn’t the right one either – after going
another six kilometres upwards, the worms enter another side tunnel. This is narrower, and the side fins
scrape on any failed Pilot roll, with blade replacements needed on 11-12.
The next shaft is obviously the right one – there are so many “worms”
that the water seems to be constantly rippling, and the engines labour as the
screws chew up their mucus-like “flesh.” More can be seen flowing in at
occasional cross tunnels. At the top of the shaft there’s a wide opening
leading into a conical ice chamber, a few hundred metres wide, like an ice
“funnel” which is packed with the “worms.” The top of the chamber slowly
melts up into the ice as a vertical shaft about twenty metres wide, running
first through ice, then eventually through rock, while the entrance of the
funnel freezes closed below it, and below the submarine. The base of the funnel begins to solidify as ice,
and the pressure begins to rise rapidly, although not enough to damage the submarine. Eventually the top
of the shaft breaks through the surface of Ceres and everything inside is pumped out by the pressure,
becoming a “geyser” of water vapour then ice crystals, which either evaporate or fall back to the surface
of Ceres, along with the contaminants Ceres has eliminated; a few tons of various pollutants including
arsenic, barium, beryllium and cobalt salts, and most of the rest of the chemical alphabet. There isn’t
enough of any one chemical to be worth salvaging.
• If the adventurers do nothing the submarine is blasted out at about 70 KPH, flies a few hundred
metres, then crashes back to the surface. This is survivable if the adventurers are strapped down in
their seats and wearing their spacesuits; the crash shatters one of the ports, and anyone without a suit
starts to take damage from vacuum, anyone not strapped down also takes impact damage:
Exposure to Vacuum, Effect 6+1/5 sec, A: F, B: I, C: C/K
Impact, Effect 5, A: F, B: I, C: C/K
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 148 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

•

If they run the propellers in reverse they can slow the ship to about 40 KPH; this will leave everyone
shaken but uninjured if they were strapped down. There will be a slow air leak, rather than sudden
decompression, giving everyone time to get their suits on. If they weren’t strapped down they take
impact damage:
Impact, Effect 3, A: F, B: I, C: C/K
• If they used the anchors as well as reverse thrust they can ride out the initial geyser then release the
anchors and float to the surface, without injury. The top of the shaft will start to freeze over after a
few minutes, within hours it will be frozen solid to a depth of several hundred metres. This is probably
the optional solution.
All of the above results leave the submarine on the surface about 12 kilometres from base camp, and
easily recovered by the tractors. However, it’s possible that they will instead decide to fire up the main
engine and blast into space:
• If they try this while still in the narrow shaft there’s a massive steam explosion behind the submarine,
which sends the SILGRS into space but leaves it tumbling end over end until the pilot can make a
Difficulty 8 skill roll to stop it, using some of the precious supply of compressed air in attitude control
jets, then Difficulty 6 to get into a stable orbit.
• If they wait until the geyser has erupted only the latter roll is needed.
• If these rolls fail on 11 or less there is time to make more skill rolls, but Difficulty rises with each
failure. If Difficulty passes 12 the SILGRS crashes as described below.
• If either roll fails on a natural 12 the SILGRS ploughs back into the surface of Ceres at high speed,
with the occupants taking impact damage:
Impact, Effect 10, A: F, B: I, C: C/K (Effect halved if they are strapped in)
Additionally the occupants take damage from vacuum as above if they aren’t wearing suits. The
SILGRS is probably damaged beyond repair, and ends up on the surface 3D6 x 10 KM from base
camp. Recovery will take several hours.
• If the SILGRS makes it into space it can be recovered by the support ship within 2D6 hours. This
shouldn’t be a problem if the adventurers added reserve tanks for this contingency; if not, they will
need to put on space suits if rescue takes more than 6 hours, because supplies will be running out.
This is inconvenient but not disastrous, and the submarine can be recovered and returned to the
surface for subsequent expeditions.
Troubleshooting: If the adventurers don’t take advantage of this escape route they will have to find another way out.
Using their engines to melt their way back to the surface at their entry point is probably the best option, but it will
be a difficult and uncomfortable ride, with the SILGRS getting hot as it is immersed in hot water, and food and
other supplies running low by the time they find the crevasse and get out again. This means of escape does so much
damage that Ceres’ defences collapse all the tunnels in a radius of several kilometres; it will be virtually impossible to
use this route to go back inside and continue exploration. It will also alienate Ceres, who will be aware of the
damage that they are doing.

End Game
Once the adventurers have made contact with Ceres, they’re potentially sitting on a scientific goldmine.
All they need do is ask the right questions and keep Ceres interested. Of course it will help if Ceres isn’t
actually dying, which means that they need to come up with a good way of getting rid of the silicon
eaters, as described above. One point to bear in mind is that Ceres has no grasp of the idea of being in a
hurry; it thinks of its year, about 4.6 Earth years, the way that a human might think of a day or two. This
means that it may not always be possible to get a quick answer. It also wants answers to questions of its
own, such as the real meaning of hundreds of Morse messages it has picked up over the years; not just the

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 149 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

literal meaning of the words, it already knows much of that, but the context in terms of human life and
society. Since many of the messages it has picked up relate to emergencies of one sort or another
including shipwrecks, piracy, mutiny and war this may give it a rather dim view of humanity. It’s also
hungry for details of the other inhabitants of the solar system, especially the current status of its old
friends the Martians. Once the Martians hear about Ceres they will want to visit their old friend; arranging
that may end up as another interesting experience.
Meanwhile, the adventurers will undoubtedly want details of Ceres’ life, evolution, etc. It doesn’t
always know the answers, especially when asked about its own origins; it thinks that it started out as
random flows of water and electrical charges inside the asteroid, and gradually developed into a
consciousness, but doesn’t know for sure. It’s willing to consider the idea of a creator, God, etc. but will
not be easy to convince.
Once they’ve made contact the news will soon spread across the solar system, since Ceres’ signals will
be picked up on Mars and Earth. They will receive dozens of signals from the Smithsonian, the League,
and other interested parties, ranging from requests for information to threats, begging messages, even
bizarre proposals of marriage – addressed to Ceres! This process begins while the SILGRS is still under the
ice, since Ceres needs to transmit very powerful signals to penetrate to its visitors; there is no question of
hushing up the discovery. Some think that it’s all a hoax created by the adventurers, others that they’re in
touch with an alien civilisation based inside Ceres; the idea that the asteroid itself is alive is difficult to
grasp. This is, of course, a big problem if the adventurers started out looking for somewhere to hide, or
planning to discredit the idea of life in Ceres, as described in some of the optional motives above.

Bonus Points
This isn’t a particularly dangerous scenario, although there are moments when things can go badly wrong.
Bonus points should be awarded for success or failure in making contact with Ceres:
• The adventurers learn Ceres is alive, but alienate it by causing damage 1 point
• Friendly first contact and Ceres is willing to keep talking
3 points
• The silicon eater problem was recognised and study has begun
2 points
• The adventurers tried a sonic solution but didn’t spot the flaws
-1 point
• The adventurers look for better solutions
2 points
• The SILGRS is wrecked
-2 points
• Add individual bonus points for cunning plans, creative use of skills, heroics, making the referee
laugh, and anything else that makes the game more entertaining.

Notes
Ideas in this adventure were suggested by several sources, not least:
James White, Major Operation (1971)
Terry Pratchett, The Far Side of the Sun (1976)
Olaf Stapledon, Star Maker (1937)
Fantastic Voyage (Film 1966)
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, When the World Screamed (1928)
Isaac Asimov, The World Ceres, science article (1972)
Jeff Barber and John Tynes, Grace Under Pressure, Call of Cthulhu adventure (1990)

For information on the real Ceres see Wikipedia’s article and the Planetary Society web site:
http://planetary.org/explore/topics/asteroids_and_comets/ceres.html
The structure of the real Ceres may be much as described, although the ice layer is probably not as
thick or complicated as in this adventure. Many thanks to everyone who suggested punning section names
etc.; in the end I decided that two were probably enough.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 150 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Earth Girls Aren’t Easy

W

HEN the owner of Titan’s largest gold mine dies under mysterious circumstances
his daughter must return to Nivia, the City of Snow, to settle his affairs and
unravel the mystery of his death. But Titan is a world of secrets, some of them
lethally dangerous, and there may be problems…

Three months ago Sam Barton, owner of the Lucky
Seven Mine in Nivia, died after the radium battery of his
thermosuit exploded.

The incident is virtually unprecedented; most of the weight
of a radium battery is armour and shielding designed to prevent
such accidents. Barton’s heir is his daughter Amanda, who was
brought up by relatives after the death of her mother eleven
years ago. Nobody is sure what she plans; will she close the
mine and put a dozen men out of work, or find some way to
revitalise the ailing business? Are the mines even relevant any
more, when Titan flame-orchid gems are worth many times
their weight in radium? And how will the arrival of a beautiful
young heiress and her equally beautiful secretary affect the
(mostly male) population of Earth’s most remote colony? These
and many other questions may or may not be answered in this
adventure.
This scenario is designed for use with the melodramatic /
romantic style of play, with the players running characters in a
mystery set mainly in the “city” of Nivia (population 70). It’s
most suitable for use as a one-off game with the pre-generated
characters provided, and has been run successfully at several
conventions. It might also be used as a freeform game, although
more characters would probably be needed.

The ‘Grand Tour’ Campaign

This adventure doesn’t work well with the
style of play and cast of the Grand Tour
campaign described above, but it can be
adapted as the background for a Grand
Tour adventure, with the characters listed
below used as NPCs.
For this purpose the Endeavour has
been sent to Titan on other business,
which includes collecting spare parts which
are to be delivered by the Christiaan
Huygens, the liner which takes Amanda
Barton to Titan. While waiting for the
liner to arrive they’ll hear all about Sam
Barton’s death, the impending arrival of
his heir, etc. It doesn’t appear to affect
them personally, but Amanda will
eventually appeal for help, having made
sure that none of the adventurers were on
Titan at the time of her father’s death.
Amanda hopes that her presence may
shake loose a few answers; with League
representatives around it might be possible
to solve the mystery, and if the death is
murder bring her father’s killer to justice.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 151 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Nivia, the City of Snow
Titan is an American possession, with a total population of just over 100 excluding transients such as the
crew of the Christiaan Huygens. Roughly seventy live in Nivia (the name is Latin for “Snow white”), the
rest are traders and prospectors living in the wilderness, supplied by ferry rocket. The city is built in a
valley in the upper plateau of the Mountains of the Damned, several thousand feet above mean ice level.
To the east and west valley walls and rock ridges protect the city from the worst winds; the main slopes of
the mountain are a mile or so further east and two miles to the west, several miles north and south.
While its name may seem a misnomer for a settlement with a population around seventy, American
history has ample precedent for calling tiny settlements cities. The name is intended as a promise of things
to come and a symbol of the colony’s hopes for the future. Officially Nivia is an incorporated city
governed by a mayor (actually a major since it is also technically a military base), twinned with Kodiak,
Alaska, and the capital and economic hub of Titan.
Most buildings are constructed of native rock, with a minimum of materials shipped from Earth.
Buildings rarely protrude more than one storey above ground, but may be dug down two or three storeys
into the rock. They’re linked by a network of “cut and cover” tunnels bulldozed into the ground and
roofed over, carrying pedestrian traffic, pipes, and cables, and by some rough roads, also cleared by
bulldozer and mostly intended for trucks and tracked vehicles.

The landing field has two cleared pads, one [1] normally used by the colony’s ferry rocket, the other
[2] by visiting ships. It’s generally considered to be a dangerous landing site, with high wind speeds and
snow the norm; there’s a half-hour lull in the wind every seven and a half days, and visiting ships try to
time their arrival and landing for that period. The ferry pilots are used to Titan’s conditions and prepared
to fly in anything short of a blizzard. The field has a warehouse and control tower [3] built into the side
of the west ridge. On the other side of the ridge the main structures are the power plant [4], a food
processing plant and hydroponic farm [5], the Iceberg Hotel [6], residential units [7], the hospital [8],
the Lucky Seven gold mine [9], which also produces most of the copper used by the colony, the Mayor’s
residence and “city hall” [10], a shop [11], workshops [12], and an iron mine and small smelter [13].
Buildings etc. are described in a little more detail in later sections; briefly, they are utilitarian but the
interiors are enlivened by occasional murals and other creative works of varying quality.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 152 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Titan’s economy is based on gold and other minerals, scientific research, and support of expeditions to
the outer planets. The recent recession cut funding for research, including exploration of the outer
planets, and while the economy is slowly recovering the effects are slow to reach Titan.
There are no immediate plans to expand the city, but it’s hoped that a domed park and a proper
church and school will eventually be built. This will only be possible if there is some real economic
growth. Fortunately the League plans construction of a Patrol base, to be used as a supply base and as a
“springboard” for further exploration of the outermost planets; previous expeditions have done little
more than stop on Titan to resupply, and contributed relatively little to the colony’s economy.
A relatively new development is the Earth fashion for Titan flame-orchid gems, which has brought in
dozens of newcomers, but does little for Titan’s economy. The stones are still valuable, but the brutal fact
is that hugely valuable gems only remain hugely valuable while they are rare. The first was sold for half a
million dollars; now the average market price for a good sized stone is around fifty thousand and slowly
falling. The gems are beautiful, but with so many traders trying to get rich it’s possible that the market
will eventually become saturated.

Trouble on Titan (Referee Only)
Titan’s gold industry is in trouble; although the price of gold has risen a little since the economic recession
began, the costs of mining it and getting it back to Earth have risen much more. Because profits were
falling some investors began to sponsor flame-orchid prospectors instead of the mine, and Barton needed
their money to buy equipment to expand the operation.
Barton’s death was indirectly caused by the flame-orchid boom. For some time a few of the colonists
have known that they can culture flame-orchids by placing fragments of a broken stone onto gravel found
in caves on the Mountains of the Damned. It wasn’t long before they got hold of the soil, and took a
chance on smashing small gems to start their own production. They decided to conceal the news as long
as they could, since flame-orchids could become worthless if it got out.
Barton decided to reveal the truth, hoping that if the flame-orchid boom ended there would be more
investment in his mine. Unfortunately he made the decision while drunk, and while Titan was on the
wrong side of Saturn for radio contact with Earth, and told exactly the wrong people what he planned to
do; they both independently decided to eliminate the problem.
Mayor Williams plans to retire on the stones he has been cultivating; a soldier and demolitions expert,
he found it easy to rig Barton’s thermo-suit power pack to explode the next time it was exposed to cold,
then warned Barton that there were signs of loose rocks on the ridge above the mine. Barton went out
with three of his men to check the ridge, and was injured by the explosion and poisoned by debris that
entered his body. That would have eventually killed him slowly, but another killer intervened.
Belle Nova, manager of the Iceberg hotel, is secretly a spy for a pirate gang, and has been tipping them
off when cargoes of gold or flame-orchids are ready to ship to Earth. She realised that the stones would
be worthless if the secret was revealed. When Barton seemed to be recovering she finished him off by
smothering him with a pillow. So far nobody suspects.
Player characters include Amanda Barton and private eye Paula Gunn, both investigating the death;
the killers, Mayor Williams and Belle Nova; and two others with an interest in the case, Doctor Grigori
Hauser, who operated on Barton and isn’t entirely sure how he died, and Dick Curtis, Barton’s foreman
and one of the witnesses to the “accident” that led to his death. The adventure should largely consist of
their interaction; background details and some optional events are provided, but the players should make
most of the action. If there are less than six players it’s suggested that the referee should play Dick Curtis
and/or Dr. Hauser and other NPCs. If there are more, some of the crew of Endeavour might be added.
This adventure is set a few years after the events of Flight on Titan, and the colony has grown slightly in
the intervening years.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 153 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Andrea Walsh, secretary, age 23
BODY 4, MIND 5, SOUL 3
TRAITS: HEIRESS (DISGUISED)
QUOTE: “Should I take notes, Miss Barton?”
ACTOR (PRETEND TO BE YOUR OWN SECRETARY) 5, ATHLETE (SWIMMING, CLIMBING) 6, BRAWLING 5, BUSINESS 7,
MARKSMAN 6, PILOT (SPACESHIP) 5, SCIENTIST (GEOLOGY, MINEROLOGY) 6, STEALTH 4
You are really Amanda Barton, the daughter of Sam Barton, owner of the Lucky Seven gold mine on Titan.
Following his death several months ago you have begun to suspect that he was murdered; the details that have
reached Earth are so vague that you think someone is hiding something. Because you aren’t an idiot you have
decided to hire a professional to deal with it; private detective Paula Gunn, who is masquerading as you, while you
pretend to be her secretary and will deal with any business or technical problems that arise. You’re reasonably sure
that nobody will recognise you; your father sent you to live with relatives on Earth after your mother died when you
were twelve, and you’ve changed a lot since then, and you don’t think your father had any recent photos. Paula
actually looks more like you did as a teenager than you do! Together you’ve travelled to Titan in search of answers.
You also need to make arrangements to ensure that the company can continue to operate without your father. The
current recession has affected gold prices, and with the craze for flame-orchid gems you may need to raise wages, or
some miners may decide to start trading with the natives instead of working for a living.
You are a romantic heroine; you pride yourself on your head for business, but can’t deny that you sometimes let
your romantic urges overcome your common sense. You yearn to be swept off your feet by Mister Right, and it
hasn’t escaped your attention that the population of Titan predominantly consists of unmarried young men. But you
suspect that someone on Titan murdered your father. You will want to be VERY sure that Mister
Right isn’t Mister Wrong before you commit to him.
Relationships: You think of Paula Gunn as a friend and ally, but don’t really know anyone on
Titan any more. You vaguely remember Doctor Hauser, who wrote to tell you of your father’s
death, he gave you dozens of inoculations before you flew to Earth, but that’s about all.
. 32 automatic, 4 clips bullets (fragmentation)
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)
Portable typewriter, dictation recorder

Amanda Barton, heiress, age 23
BODY 5, MIND 4, SOUL 3
TRAITS: SECRET QUOTE: “See to the luggage, and find out if there’s room service.”
ACTOR (DISGUISE, ASSUME FALSE IDENTITY) 6, ATHLETE (TRACK AND FIELD) 7, BRAWLING 8, BUSINESS 5, DETECTIVE 6,
MARKSMAN 8, MELEE WEAPON 8, PSYCHOLOGY 5, STEALTH 6, THIEF (PICK LOCKS, POCKETS, ETC.) 6
You are really Paula Gunn, private detective, posing as Amanda Barton, daughter of Sam Barton, owner of the
Lucky Seven mine on Titan. The real Amanda is travelling as your secretary, Andrea Walsh.
Following the death of her father several months ago she has begun to suspect that he was murdered; the details
that have reached Earth are so vague that you both think someone is hiding something. She’s hired you to
investigate his death; since you think she might be another target, you’ve persuaded her to let you impersonate her.
You think you stand a better chance of surviving an attack. Together you’ve travelled to Titan in search of answers.
One problem – you’ve never been off-world before, you’re a little claustrophobic, and the pictures you’ve seen
of Titan’s natives aren’t at all appealing. You also know little of the mining industry; if problems arise the real
Amanda will have to handle them. You pretend to be the type of boss who makes her secretary do all the work.
You are a stereotypical private eye: your fists are quick (sometimes too quick) and you tend to meet problems with
violence, not subtlety. It hasn’t escaped your attention that the population of Titan is mostly unmarried young men,
some of them owning incredibly valuable flame-orchid gems, but you’re a cynic, and suspect that
at best you might manage a brief fling before you have to leave or shoot someone. You will want
to be VERY sure that Mister Right isn’t Mister Wrong before you commit to anything more.
Relationships: You like Amanda, but she’s primarily your client, not a friend. Remember that
it’s your job to protect her and investigate her father’s death, and that you will be out a very
large pay check if any harm comes to her. You don’t believe you know anyone on Titan.
. 380 automatic, 4 clips fragmentation bullets, 2 clips Boland explosive bullets.
Lock Knife Effect 6, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Brass knuckles +1 Effect to punch
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 154 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Dick Curtis, Mine foreman, age 32
BODY 5, MIND 4, SOUL 3
TRAITS: WANTED QUOTE: “This part of the mine is dangerous, better stay clear.”
ATHLETE (MOUNTAINEER)_6, BRAWLING 8, BUSINESS 5, FIRST AID 5, MARKSMAN 6, MECHANIC 5, MELEE WEAPON 6,
MILITARY WEAPONS (EXPLOSIVES) 5, STEALTH 3, THIEF 5
You are Dick Curtis (alias Arthur Gill, Terrence Cooper), former minor Chicago mobster. Five years ago you
took it on the lam after a small accident; you accidentally boarded a rocket with $650,000 of your boss’s money.
By the time you’d spent most of the money the mob was closing in and you thought it best to move on; you heard
that gold had been found on Titan, and parlayed some old union contacts into a mining job. A year later the stock
market collapsed, wiping out your remaining assets on Earth. Fortunately you turned out to be a reasonably good
miner, and were eventually promoted to foreman. As such you have a few nice little scams; most notably you have
a pound or so of gold nuggets which the company will never miss, and nine flame-orchid gems growing in a box of
rock dust in your refrigerator. They’re worth a fortune on Earth, but if news that they can be cultured gets back
they’ll lose most of their value.
You saw the explosion that led to Barton’s death. There are rumours that it wasn’t accidental, and the news that
his daughter will be on the next ship from Earth has you worried; you weren’t involved in his death, but if there’s
going to be some sort of investigation you want to make sure that you won’t be caught in the frame. It’s time to
turn on the old charm, make yourself as helpful as possible, and see what you can find out.
You are an anti-hero: Despite a shady past, the right woman may bring out the hero in you.
Relationships: You liked Sam Barton but thought of him as your boss, not a friend. You’ve
never met Amanda, she left Titan long before your arrival; you’re expecting a spoiled heiress.
You’ve slept with Belle Nova but distrust her. Dr Hauser is a lush but a good doctor, Mayor
Williams is an officious bureaucrat, but you don’t know either well.
.45 automatic, 4 clips normal ammo, 1 clip Boland explosive bullets.
Jack Knife Effect 6, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)
Access to mining supplies and tools

Doctor Grigori Hauser, Surgeon, age 55
BODY 2, MIND 5, SOUL 4
TRAITS: ADDICT, SECRET QUOTE: “Ahh! I remember spring in Budapest...”
BRAWLING 3, DOCTOR (SURGEON) 6, FIRST AID 8, LINGUIST (ENGLISH, GERMAN, FRENCH, RUSSIAN) 7, LINGUIST
(MARTIAN) 2, LINGUIST (VENUSIAN) 1, PSYCHOLOGY 7, SCIENTIST (CHEMISTRY, BOTANY, TITAN ZOOLOGY) 7
You are Grigori Hauser, once a brilliant up-and-coming surgeon in Budapest, but now medical officer of the
decrepit Titan base. our A patient died in Budapest because you operated on him while you were drunk. Now you
believe that history may have repeated itself in Sam Barton’s death – you don’t remember doing anything wrong
when you operated, but your memory of that fateful day is blurry at best, and he died just a few hours later.
There are other skeletons in your closet. In the early years of colonisation a supply shipment was lost, and food
was running out. You improvised a way to process Titanian proteins to be edible by humans; unfortunately the only
bulk source available was the semi-intelligent natives. You and the other survivors swore a vow of silence, but it’s a
very loud silence – everyone on Titan seems to know that something happened. Today the food factory can process
Titan’s plants for protein; you invented the technology, but would prefer its history to be forgotten. You are a tragic
anti-hero, and would welcome an opportunity to atone for your misdeeds, even at the cost of your own life.
Titan’s most valuable exports, flame-orchid gems, aren’t as rare as everyone on Earth believes. They can be
cultured by “planting” pieces of a broken gem in Titan soil. If the right chemicals are present new gems grow. If
news of this reaches Earth their value will plummet. You have six roughly the size of acorns, worth
tens of thousands, but that could change with a few incautious words.
Relationships: You just about remember Amanda Barton as a child; it will be interesting to see
the woman. You have treated everyone at one time or another and know some secrets: the Mayor
is a mild hexylamine addict, Belle Nova has twice contracted social diseases, Rick Deckard has
bullet and knife scars. Naturally you would not dream of violating medical secrecy.
. 32 automatic, 4 clips bullets (fragmentation)
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)
Medical kit, the resources of a well-equipped hospital.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 155 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Major Richard Williams (United Americas Army) age 45
BODY 5, MIND 4, SOUL 3
TRAITS: ADDICT, VILLAIN QUOTE: “It was a terrible accident...”
BRAWLING 7, BUSINESS 6, MARKSMAN 8, MELEE WEAPON 7, MILITARY ARMS 6, MORSE CODE 6, PILOT 7
You are Major Richard Williams, known to everyone as Mayor Williams, once a highly decorated soldier, now
leader of America’s least desirable colony. A none-too-discreet relationship with a General’s wife led to your sudden
“promotion” to this dead-end job, and there is little hope of a return to your old duties. These days you rarely even
wear a uniform, and you command just six soldiers who mostly function as police. You have acquired a mild
hexylamine addiction; if that ever comes out you might as well forget your military career.
The death of Sam Barton was an unfortunate necessity; Barton knew that there was little hope of investment in
his mine while there was a craze for flame-orchid gems on Earth, and was planning to reveal that they can be
“grown” in the right soil. That would destroy the market and leave gold as Titan’s most valuable export; since you
own eight large flame-orchid gems that wouldn’t suit you at all. You killed him by sabotaging his Thermoskin suit;
soon after he switched on its heating the radium battery exploded. For a while there you thought he might survive,
but fortunately that didn’t happen. He died, probably from heart failure, the following night.
You’ve heard that the passengers on the next ship will include Barton’s daughter, who is presumably going to
settle his affairs. You must do nothing to arouse her suspicions. After he died you searched his apartment,
destroyed a draft report he planned to send to Earth, and took a large cultured flame-orchid gem from his office.
You are a melodramatic villain; as such you are destined to be caught! Your role in this adventure is to fail as
memorably as possible, but if possible escape to be villainous another day!
Relationships: You’ve never met Amanda Barton or her secretary. Doctor Hauser is a lush, too
drunk to be any sort of threat. You’ve slept with Belle Nova and don’t trust her at all; she’s a
selfish money-grubbing bitch. Curtis was Barton’s right-hand man and could be trouble.
.45 automatic, 4 clips normal ammo, 2 clip Boland explosive bullets.
Jack Knife Effect 6, A:F, B:I, C:C/K
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)
Access to military weapons including explosives, flame pistols, machine guns, etc.

Belle Nova, “Hostess”, age 27 (actually 39)
BODY 4, MIND 4, SOUL 2
TRAITS: SCARLET WOMAN, VILLAIN QUOTE: “Just let me get more… comfortable.”
ACTRESS (SINGER) 6, ATHLETE (SEX) 5, BRAWLING 7, BUSINESS 6, MELEE WEAPON 7, MORSE CODE 7, THIEF 8.
You are Belle Nova (real name Bella Phelps, AKA Bella Graves, Belle Phillips), manager of Titan’s Iceberg Hotel.
You are a whore with a heart of flint; you won’t do anything for customers without cash up front.
You have a few secrets; most notably, a long criminal record and your second job as a spy for one of the pirate
gangs that plague the spaceways. You’re not sure who you work for, there are too many intermediaries, but you
suspect that it’s Red Peri herself. You warn them of lucrative shipments heading for Earth; the pirates presumably do
the rest. You know that two of the ships you reported vanished with some very valuable cargo.
Sam Barton told you that he planned to make flame-orchid gems worthless by revealing that they could be
cultured. You knew that something had to be done to stop him. After he was fortuitously injured you sneaked into
his room and smothered him with a pillow. You don’t believe anyone knows how he really died.
The passengers on the next ship will include Barton’s daughter, who is presumably going to settle his affairs. You
don’t want to arouse her suspicions. You’re also expecting some movies from Earth, which you will show at the
hotel. Some will be boring League “cultural” material, but you’ve paid to import a couple of money-makers.
You are a melodramatic villainess; as such you are destined to be caught! Your role in this
adventure is to fail as memorably as possible, but if possible escape to be villainous another day!
Relationships: You’ve never met Amanda Barton. Doctor Hauser is an old lush, but he’s
harmless. He knows you sleep around; he’s treated you for a social disease. Mayor Williams is a
creep who expects a free ride. You’ve slept with Curtis but don’t trust him; no way does a miner
have that many bullet and knife scars. You think he might have been a soldier or mobster.
. 32 automatic, 4 clips bullets (fragmentation)
Radio transmitter (interplanetary range, concealed in your office)
Thermoskin suit (protects against cold)

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 156 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Timetable
The only pre-determined events in this scenario are the arrival and departure of the liner Christiaan
Huygens. She lands on Titan on October 1st, and starts to unload and refuel immediately. The optimum
takeoff time for the return flight is one orbit later, on October 16th at 2.35 PM, with the window for a
safe return to Earth October 14th to 18th. After that the next window is two days either side of
November 26th; after that the ship can’t carry enough fuel to reach Earth without exceeding safety limits,
and the safest alternative is to fly via Ganymede. This is very much a last resort, and exceptional
circumstances would be needed to make the ship delay even a minute past its scheduled takeoff time.
This is the only rigid time frame in this adventure; “Amanda” and “Andrea” are booked for the return
flight, and will probably want to take it since it’s the last ship for several months; apart from that,
everything else happens as it is instigated by the characters, or in response to their actions.
Counting the passengers and crew of the Huygens there will be about eighty people in the city at the
start of the adventure, with fourteen of the passengers heading off into the wilderness to seek fire-orchids
over the next few days. Most of these treasure-seekers are single men in their twenties and thirties, with
very little idea of just how hostile Titan can be. None of them impressed “Amanda” or “Andrea” as an
appropriately eligible bachelor during the flight, and none have any relevance to the plot. The ship’s crew
will mostly be living aboard during their stay, apart from occasional trips into town on business.
Unless someone suggests other arrangements, “Amanda” and “Andrea” will probably want to stay in
Sam Barton’s home or the hotel.

Conditions on Titan
It’s important to remind the players that the adventurers are not on Earth. Essentially, Titan is a more
extreme climate than Antarctica, with a faster cycle of seasons as it orbits Saturn. In mid-“winter,”
ironically the time when Titan is at its closest to the Sun, the Sun isn’t visible from Nivia and the
temperature is “eighty below zero” (-80ºF, about -62ºC); in “summer” the temperature is a little above
freezing. The Christiaan Huygens lands during the mid-“winter” lull, a period of about thirty minutes in
which the wind slackens prior to changing direction. For most of the year anyone going outdoors without
the full protection of a thermosuit will be dead in minutes; even in “summer” wind chill drops the
effective temperature to 9ºF, about -13ºC. If the wind doesn’t blow you away it will freeze you. Most
people going outdoors rope up or travel in tracked vehicles. The xenon-rich air is dense, which affects the
resonance of air in the human windpipe; voices sound deep and a little muffled.
Natives visit the city occasionally, apparently unaware of the fate that befell some of their ancestors.
The natives in this area rarely have flame-orchid gems to trade – it’s likely that they have already taken all
that they can find. They often have other items such as stones carved to interesting shapes by the wind,
mineral and vegetable samples, and so forth, which might be of interest to scientists or collectors.
On the surface it’s easy to spot the route of the underground tunnels; the heat they release attracts
ice-ants, and their domes follow the tunnel routes. They seem to have learned to avoid the roads, which
are ploughed every few days. They’re mostly harmless; there have been a few ice-ant incursions into the
colony, but they don’t thrive without snow and the fungi they prefer to eat, and are easily evicted.
However, they will try to take anything organic left lying around, with a particular fondness for natural
cloth (not synthetics), paper and leather. Despite this most colonists are rather fond of the little creatures,
about the least dangerous species on Titan, and there have been suggestions that ice-ants should become
Titan’s “national animal,” in the same way that the eagle was the national animal of the old USA.
Most of the other native animals avoid the area, or have been hunted out. Whiplash trees are the main
vegetation; the food factory can process them if necessary. In a real emergency the ice-ants could also be
processed, as could the fungus they eat, but this would be a last resort, trees are easier to handle.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 157 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Exploring the City
What follows is a brief description of the most important parts of the city, which referees may want to
flesh out with more detail. Numbers in italics refer to the city map. All NPCs mentioned (such as radio
operators, pilots, etc.) should be assumed to have BODY 3-5, MIND 4-5, SOUL 3-5 and whatever skills are
required for their jobs. Names are given for many residents, but try to give the impression that there are
others around who simply don’t happen to be interacting with the adventurers. Many have multiple roles
and duties; for example, the colony’s police force are soldiers serving their tour of duty in America’s
most remote colony, and all have other jobs when the colony doesn’t need police or soldiers.
Adventurers may run into them in more than one role. The referee should be ready to brief players on
parts of the city that they’re associated with as needed; for example, Belle’s player probably needs to
know about the hotel’s facilities, the movies expected, etc. The exact internal layout of buildings is not
important; referees should invent details as they wish. All buildings are linked by telephone.
Landing field: Several square miles of rocky
ground, with two landing pads [1,2] cleared of
boulders, and cleared of snow before ships
arrive. The facilities are good, with landing
lights, radio aids, and a control tower [3]
equipped to “talk down” ships in bad weather.
The tower has storage and fuelling facilities, and can provide a good grade of powdered iron ore or a
somewhat poorer grade of copper ore for radium engines; salt is not available in bulk, but that’s not a
problem since ships with uranium blasts probably couldn’t make such a long trip anyway. The tower
also houses Titan’s main radio station, which has the range to reach the inner planets. The smaller
landing pad is mostly used by the colony’s ferry rocket, the Opis (named for Saturn’s wife in Roman
mythology). It’s a rugged general-purpose craft able to travel to any part of Titan’s surface with a few
tons of cargo and passengers, equipped with underjets and wings for prolonged horizontal flight, but
doesn’t have life support (beyond a heater to keep the compartments warm) or the “legs” to reach
the other moons or go further afield. There is always a radio operator on duty in the tower, listening
out for messages from the other planets, distress calls, etc.
The tower is also the colony’s weather station and local radio station, and the duty operator plays
music wires and reads occasional news and weather bulletins on the rare days that the weather isn’t
completely predictable. The music is an eclectic mix; basically everything that has ever been shipped
out gets played over and over again regardless of its nature or quality.
Harold Plumb
Patrick Satterwhite
Arthur Gaskill
Jeff Spector
Joe Bolden

Radio operator, Army Corporal
Radio operator, Meteorologist
Ferry Pilot, Engineer
Engineer, Driver, Army Sergeant
Warehouse manager, Army Corporal, Driver

Power Plant: The city gets its power and much of its heat from a small radium blast [4] burning few
pounds of iron or copper ore a day. The exhaust heats water to drive a steam turbine and (via heat
exchangers) warm the city. The equipment is kept manned in case of accidents or breakdown, but
hasn’t given serious problems in several years. Fuel for several weeks is kept on site, topped up as
needed. One of the technicians will be leaving with the Huygens, which brought in his replacement:
Jacob Caro
Gregory Weatherspoon
Kenneth Magee
Sean Bauer

Power plant technician, Cook
Power plant technician, Army Corporal; tour complete, leaving aboard the Huygens
Power plant technician, Lay preacher (Baptist)
Heating engineer, Plumber

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 158 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Food Factory: Titan is at the end of a long supply line, and several ships were lost in the early days. The
colony survived partly by strict rationing, and partly by processing Titan life forms to make them
edible (although unpleasant to eat). The colony now has a food factory [5], which processes Titan’s
plants and animals to remove arsenic; in the early days of the colony this material was eaten by
humans without much further processing, but it is now converted into much more palatable (but
somewhat bland) food concentrates, or used as feed-stock for a new hydroponic farm. The farm
produces staples such as rice and edible algae, and recently introduced several species of fish and
crayfish. The farm is also the colony’s sewage processing plant. Visitors expecting to see giant
greenhouses will be disappointed; given Titan’s distance from the sun it makes little sense to use
sunlight for the plants, instead the farm is illuminated by banks of daylight fluorescent lights, and the
roofs and walls are thick featureless slabs to conserve heat. One aspect of the operation should be
mentioned; the factory produces nearly all of the beer and hard liquor on Titan, apart from rare and
extraordinarily expensive imports. It’s drinkable, but that’s about all that can be said for it.
Nicholas Mcfarland
Jacob Potts
Jacob Beene
Margarita Beene

Hydroponics technician, Administrator
Chemical engineer, Ecologist
Chemical engineer, Hydroponics technician
Hydroponics technician, Typist, Photographer

Iceberg Hotel: Titan’s only hotel and bar [6] has accommodation for 20 guests. Most of the time it’s
nearly empty, though the bar is busy most evenings. Obviously the economics of the business make
little sense; it’s heavily subsidised by the American government so that visitors will have somewhere to
stay, and residents will have somewhere they can let off a little steam. The manager, Belle Nova,
employs a part-time barman and (when busy) a part-time cook and housekeeper. The bar has a music
wire player and card tables. There’s a larger “ballroom” used for occasional social events such as
parties and public meetings, amateur dramatics and for movies when films are delivered from Earth.
The Christiaan Huygens has seven movies aboard, four provided by the League as part of its cultural
unification program, one by the American government for similar reasons, and two ordered by Belle:
•

•
•
•

•
•

•

News Review – a two-hour newsreel summary of the most recent news from Earth and the other planets up
to a day or so before takeoff. It includes events on Earth, Venus, Mars, and the moons of Jupiter. If the
adventurers have been in the public eye on any of these worlds it may be mentioned. The tone is generally
upbeat; for example the financial news minimises the effects of the recent depression and concentrates on
the economic recovery. Provided by the League.
Gold Diggers of 2115 – The latest smash hit musical, considered a significant cultural event in its inclusion of
music from a dozen Earth nations, and an amazing zero-gravity dance routine. Provided by the League.
Romeo and Juliet – The Royal Shakespeare Company’s critically acclaimed production, set on Ganymede and
featuring a mixed Human / Nympus cast. Provided by the League.
Family Fun – a compilation of eight short animated films from studios in several nations featuring Micky
Mouse, Donald Duck, the Road Runner, a Russian folk tale, and others, plus three episodes of the everpopular serial Planet Patrol, based on “real adventures of the men and women of the League of Nations
Patrol.” Provided by the League.
America Today – Similar to News Review, but concentrating much more on events inside the United
Americas, and generally emphasising America’s role as the most powerful nation in the Solar System.
Provided by the American government.
Bon Baisers de Vénus (With Kisses From Venus) – A romantic comedy, in which the goddess Venus assumes
human form and travels from her world to Earth by stowing away on a freighter, wreaking havoc aboard ship
and in Paris. Includes risqué situations and nudity, banned in Rome, Cleveland and Chicago. French with
English subtitles. Ordered by Belle.
It Came from the Red Spot! – SF / horror, in which a small isolated colony strangely like Nivia (the film uses
stock newsreel footage of the city) but allegedly on an unnamed moon of Jupiter is menaced by hideous
man-eating blobby monsters. Ordered by Belle.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 159 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Films provided by the League and the American government are supplied free of charge and are
supposed to be shown with a minimal admission charge, just enough to cover expenses. Belle has
somehow determined that this is $1.50 per movie. She charges $5.00 for the “premieres” of the two
films she has personally ordered, $2.50 for subsequent showings. All films are shown several times.
The two films Belle has purchased are her property; the others will be added to the colony’s library.
The hotel has twenty rooms on two levels below the lobby; two six-room dormitories on the lower
floor, with two shared bathrooms, and four double rooms with bathrooms on the upper. Belle also has
an apartment on the upper floor. The rooms are moderately comfortable but expensive – a dormitory
bed costs $5 a night, the double rooms cost $20 a night. Meals aren’t included in the prices, of
course. The hotel is utilitarian but more or less comfortable; all of the furnishings are getting a little old
and shabby, but given the cost of shipment from Earth it’s doubtful that anything will be done about it
any time soon. There have been attempts to use the wood of whiplash trees for furniture, but it
contains too much arsenic for safety.
Since most people visiting Titan stay longer than the turn-around time of a ship, the hotel is usually
a temporary home for visitors who will eventually occupy apartments or venture further afield in
search of flame-orchid gems. The hotel will be crowded for the first few days after the Huygens lands,
then only three guests will stay on until accommodation is prepared for them.
Staff:
Belle Nova
Brian Bentz
Melody Bentz
Guests:
Mark Bowles
Dennis Peterman
Eric Felton

Manager
Barman, Mechanic
Part-time Cook / Housekeeper, Librarian
Power plant technician (Starting work at the city power plant)
Engineer (Starting work at Titan Iron Inc)
Dentist, Anaesthetist (Starting work at the hospital)

Residential Units: While it would be most practical for the colonists to live in a single structure with
dormitories etc., that isn’t the American way. Nivia was planned with the idea of it being a “small
town in space” and so it has a street of “houses” [7]; basically underground four-room apartments.
Buildings are identified by their side of the road (“inner arc” and “outer arc”) and a letter. Roughly
three-quarters of the apartments are occupied; most of the others are unfurnished shells which will be
completed as the colony expands. Amazingly, despite the standardization of accommodation there is
already some snobbery about addresses; inner arc apartments are regarded as more desirable. They are
mostly occupied by more senior personnel.
Sam Barton lived in Inner Arc P; it has not been cleared since his death. See below.
Doctor Hauser lives in Inner Arc M but also has a small apartment at the hospital, used when there are patients.
Dick Curtis lives in Outer Arc H

Outer Arc D is currently used as the colony’s school, with eight students aged 5-14 (younger
children go to the crèche in the back room of Honest Jeff’s Emporium [11], older children are usually
sent to Earth to attend high school and college). The children are taught communally, with the older
children helping the younger. Despite relatively poor facilities the school’s results are good, with most
of the colony’s adults helping out as needed; for example, science lessons often visit the food factory,
crafts classes are taken to the workshops, etc. Any visitors from Earth who call in at the school will be
subjected to a barrage of questions.
One of the students, Mildred Bentz (age 14), will be travelling to Earth aboard the Huygens. Since
she has never been exposed to many Terran diseases she is undergoing a long series of inoculations and
usually looks somewhat swollen. Female characters travelling to Earth on the Huygens may be asked to
keep an eye on her, since she will be travelling alone – her parents can’t afford to make the trip.
Craig Stack
Mamie Skipper

Teacher, former soldier (mustered out on Titan in preference to returning to Earth)
Teacher, Artist (has sold several pictures to galleries on Earth), engaged to Craig Stack

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 160 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

The Hospital: In view of Titan’s isolation anyone who is injured or becomes ill must be treated there.
Nivea’s hospital [8] is as close to state of the art as it can be, but lacks the support a hospital on Earth
would be able to get from other hospitals and specialised medical laboratories. Facilities include a wellequipped examination room, X-ray and dental equipment, four wards for a total of up to twelve
patients, and a good general-purpose operating theatre. There’s also an impressive medical laboratory
complete with autopsy room and a small morgue. The hospital’s main limitation is personnel; Hauser is
the only doctor on Titan at present, and there is only one nurse, who will have problems coping if
there are more than a handful of patients. There has been no dentist for the last eighteen months, and
Hauser isn’t a good substitute, but a replacement, Eric Felton, arrives with the Christiaan Huygens and
will be taking care of a backlog of cases. Several other colonists have first aid training, and can help
with patient care in the event of an emergency.
At the time the Christiaan Huygens lands the hospital has no patients. Sam Barton’s body is on ice in
the morgue, pending the arrival of his daughter and a proper funeral.
Dr. Grigori Hauser
Dr. Eric Felton
Jeanette Aleman

Doctor, Biologist, Chemist
Dentist, Anaesthetist
Nurse, Laboratory technician

The Lucky Seven Mine: This is Titan’s only gold mine [9]; in view of rising shipping and insurance costs
and the current obsession with flame-orchid gems nobody is putting much effort into finding gold
elsewhere. It actually produces a ton or so of copper ore and several tons of rubble for every few
ounces of gold; fortunately the grade of the copper ore is generally acceptable for use as radium blast
fuel, though occasional batches assay too low in copper to be suitable. Some of the richest ore is sent
over to the iron mine [13], where it is processed to extract pure copper. Waste rock is dumped on
the surface north and south of the mine, and spoil heaps now stretch several hundred yards in each
direction.
The mine currently consists of three levels of low-ceilinged tunnels, excavated with pneumatic drills,
following the seam of copper ore north and south along the eastern ridge for several hundred feet. To
the north the quality of the copper ore and its gold content are slowly deteriorating, to the south they
are unchanged.
Surface installations include rock crushing machinery and equipment for separating the ore (and
especially the gold) from worthless rock, plus an office, canteen, showers etc.
All of these tunnels and facilities are heated, lit and powered by the mine’s radium power plant.
This is now inadequate for the total size and power requirements of the mine, so additional power has
to be purchased from the city.
Amanda Barton needs to make several decisions about the future of the mine:
• Should excavation continue to the north, or is it time to cut losses and concentrate on the
southern tunnels? Shutting down the north tunnels would save on heating power etc., but the
ore is far from exhausted, it’s just not as good as the ore from the south. Once the tunnels are
shut down they will slowly become unsafe, unless money is spent to keep them intact.
• Should another radium power plant be purchased (a high one-off expense), or would it be
better to rely on the city power plant (a continuing expense)? Assuming that city power prices
don’t change, buying another radium power plant will pay for itself in about six years. Investors
will be needed to pay for it, of course.
• Above all else, who is going to run the mine? Sam Barton ran everything himself and didn’t
have a deputy. Dick Curtis has done a reasonable job of keeping things going, but he isn’t a
businessman and the paperwork is a mess. Amanda could stay and run things, of course, but
that isn’t what she’s planned for her life. It might be possible to recruit a suitable manager from
the colonists, or hire someone on Earth, but decisions need to be made.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 161 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Only the last of these decisions is immediately important, the others are much more long term
problems, and there may be big changes if a League base is built, but they should be mentioned to
make it clear that the mine isn’t just a source of wealth that runs without any input from its owner.
In the list of personnel below a star indicates a witness to the death of Sam Barton:
Dick Curtis
Alan Ray
Frank Husted
Justin Almeida
Philip Garay
Sean Bills
Shawn Swindell
Steve Yoshida
Jennifer Turner

Mine foreman *
Miner, Driver *
Miner, Electrician
Miner, Explosives expert, Army Sergeant *
Miner, Mechanic
Miner, Plumber, Army Corporal
Crushing machine operator, Mechanic
Crushing machine operator, Electrician
Cook, Typist (Sam Barton’s mistress, will not advertise the fact)

City Hall: The colony’s administrative centre, police station, army base, etc. [10], and Mayor Williams’
residence. Facilities include Williams’ home (a larger and slightly more luxurious version of the
apartments used by others), his office and those of his secretary and a couple of clerks, a two-man
police “precinct” with two cells for prisoners, an armoury for the colony’s soldiers (weapons include
flame guns and cannon, machine cannon, blasters, etc.), and an automated telephone exchange.
There’s also a small hall used as a court-room and for occasional ceremonies such as weddings,
although the ballroom of the Iceberg Hotel is generally more popular. It doubles as the colony’s public
library, with a collection of a few hundred books on paper and about twenty thousand on microfilm,
and a hundred or so movies. Movie shows at the library are free, but the films tend to be older and
less popular than the newest imports, which get their first showing at the Iceberg.
Bobby Calton
Andrew Paradis
Susie Cullen
Raymond Olivera
Randy Winn
Earl Toomey
Jason Mcphee

Clerk, Army Corporal
Clerk, Army Private
Secretary, Accountant (engaged to Earl Toomey)
Police / Army Sergeant, Librarian (see Police Enquiries, below.)
Police / Army Corporal, Mechanic
Police / Army Corporal, Driver
Army Sergeant (armourer), Electronics engineer

Honest Jeff’s Bank and Emporium: Titan’s only shop and bank [11] offers a wide range of products, both
new and second-hand. Some are imported from Earth; most new items are manufactured or grown
locally. It’s the place to go if you need some ammo for your gun, a radium battery for your
Thermoskin suit, an example of native carving, some ration packs, trade goods, second-hand
prospecting equipment, etc., or want to cash a check. Jeff also buys books and operates a fee-paying
lending library, concentrating on paperback thrillers etc. rather than the more “worthy” works at the
public library. It’s the most likely place to encounter natives in the colony, they’re always keen to
trade for “valuables” such as pocket knives, beads and mirrors, and Jeff keeps a large stock. His wife
Louise helps with the store and runs a small crèche for the colony’s handful of children under five.
They also operate a small printing press (“no job too big or too small”) although paper is fairly
expensive, and publish Nivia’s weekly newspaper, the Titan Times. Issues are typically 4-6 sides of pulp
paper, a by-product from the food factory, contents include news (local and from the rest of the solar
system), announcements, fiction, poetry, a crossword, etc.
Their son Gary helps out with the store, but will be travelling to Earth on the Huygens to attend
high school and college. He is fifteen, and left the colony school a few months ago to work with his
parents and await passage to Earth. He is undergoing a series of inoculations against Earth diseases.
Jeff Elwell
Louise Elwell
Gary Elwell

Trader, Printer, Handyman, Reporter, Banker
Trader, Baby-Sitter, Crossword compiler, Volunteer nursing assistant *
* On volunteer duty at the time of Sam Barton’s death; see next section
Teenager, Printer, Photographer

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 162 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Workshops: Titan needs to be as self-sufficient as possible. The workshops [12] were set up to reduce
dependence on goods imported from Earth, and are equipped with a comprehensive range of tools
and components, from simple lathes and drills to a comprehensive electronics suite, a glass-making
furnace, etc. They’re usually busy, since Titan’s harsh conditions are very hard on equipment. They
also produce a wide range of domestic items, furnishings, plumbing fittings, etc., with a large library of
specifications and diagrams on microfilm. Unusual care has been taken to limit the variety of spare
parts needed by the colonists; for example, all vehicles approved for transportation to Titan must be
built so that at least ninety percent of components and spares (such as nuts and bolts, headlight lamps,
etc.) are manufactured to standardised patterns or can be manufactured on Titan using existing
facilities. This raises the cost of vehicles, but a 200% price hike is nothing compared to the cost of
exporting a wide range of spares that won’t fit anything else. Some manufacturers have described these
restrictions as “un-American” in stifling competition, most accept it as a necessary part of business.
The workshops have a staff of five, and facilities are available to anyone who needs them for
nominal fees.
Joe Braithwaite
Fred Benjamin
Allen Bolden
Emily Bolden
Danny Kyser

Smith, Metalworker, Mechanic
Metalworker, Welder, Glassblower
Mould-maker, Plastics fabricator
Electrician, Electronics technician (Allen Bolden’s sister; engaged to Danny Keyser)
Watchmaker, Camera repairer, Jeweller

Titan Iron Inc.: Nivia’s second mine [13] taps a large deposit of magnetite, a mixture of iron and quartz,
estimated at several hundred million tons. Geologists have yet to explain why two dissimilar lodes of
ore are so close together; it’s presumably a peculiarity of Titan’s crust formation. Since most of the
ridge is made of the ore, mining is a very simple process; the rock is blasted to reduce it to large
“chunks” about the size of footballs then bulldozed to the crushing machines. The ore is crushed
repeatedly then the iron is separated magnetically. Fuel grade ore omits this final separation stage.
Once purified the iron is used to make various grades of steel. The current equipment can make
about a ton a day, more than the colony needs. If plans for a League base go ahead a larger processing
plant will be built, capable of manufacturing five or ten tons a day. At the moment some of the plant’s
spare capacity is used to refine copper ore from the Lucky Seven mine, a batch of a ton or so every
couple of weeks.
One possibility that might be considered is a merger of the two mining companies, so that
personnel and expertise can be used where most needed; Peter Kershaw has an excellent background
in the industry and could easily manage both mines, and they are already working together on matters
such as copper refining. This would require consultation with Titan Iron’s board of directors on Earth,
but could probably be agreed. The precise terms would need considerable negotiation, but would
probably amount to buying out Amanda and giving her a large cash payment, a seat on the board, and
shares in the new expanded company. Amanda does not have the resources to do things the other
way. Titan Iron currently makes less money but the owners operate several other mines, on Earth and
other worlds, and see it as a long-term investment that should pay off very nicely if a League base is
eventually built. Kershaw might suggest this if Amanda seems to be unsure how to proceed.
Peter Kershaw
Melissa Braithwaite
Harold Beecher
William Thomasson
Stephen Carter
Peter Ryles
Michael Thurston
Damon Reinhardt

Mining engineer, CEO
Secretary, Volunteer nursing assistant (Wife of Joe Braithwaite, see above)
Mine foreman, Explosives
Mechanical engineer (returning to Earth with the Christiaan Huygens)
Bulldozer driver, Ore crusher operator
Bulldozer driver, Ore crusher operator
Furnace operator, Metallurgist
Mechanic, Crane operator

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 163 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

The Body in Question
Sam Barton’s death has consequences; depending on their interests, the
adventurers may want to investigate (or cover up) the circumstances, arrange a
funeral or a wake, settle his affairs, etc. They might even want to arrange some
sort of public enquiry to look into the death; if so, Mayor Williams would
normally be the chairman.
How was Barton Injured?
The first person asked is likely to be Dick Curtis; if he is being run as a player character give the player
this summary, otherwise the referee should use it:
The day Sam Barton was injured you were getting ready for your shift when Barton called you into his
office and said that he wanted you, a driver, and another hand to come outside with him to take a look at
the ridge above the mine, where there were some loose rocks. You got Alan Ray and Justin Almeida, and
met up with Barton in the garage. The ridge is steep above the mine, so you had to drive a mile or so
north, cross it, then come back and work your way up the gentler slope on that side. When you got there
you couldn’t see any loose rocks, but Barton had you rope up to prevent anyone being blown away by
the 100 MPH wind, then you all went out to check the slope.
It was difficult to talk because of the noise of the wind, but you remember Barton saying something
about his Thermoskin suit being too hot. You think he touched the temperature control, as he did so
there was a loud bang and he collapsed, with a big hole in his side where the suit’s battery had been. He
lost a lot of blood, but you packed the wound with ice crystals to freeze it and stop the bleeding, and got
him to the hospital as fast as you could. Alan nearly wrecked the truck going down the ridge.
Barton was still alive when you got him to the hospital, and everyone thought for a while that he’d pull
through, but he died that night.
Answer these questions if you are asked, but don’t volunteer the information:
Who told Barton about the rocks? You don’t know.
Why did you pick Ray and Almeida? Ray was the only driver handy; everyone else was off shift or
down the mine. Almeida does most of the explosives work for the mine; if there were rocks to clear he’d
be the man to do it.
Why do you think Barton’s battery exploded? You don’t know, but Almeida thought that it must have
been sabotaged. Radium batteries just don’t explode accidentally; half of the weight is safety mechanisms.
Almeida will probably be the next person questioned; he tells much the same story, but in his own
words, and with enough differences to make it seem likely that both men are describing real events, not a
story they’ve concocted. The same applies to Ray.
If Almeida is asked about the explosion, he’ll confirm that radium batteries can explode, but there are
safety mechanisms which should have stopped it from happening. It’s possible to sabotage a battery to
make it explode as an improvised blaster (nuclear grenade), he’s done it as part of his army training. The
explosion was small, but sometimes that happens. They were lucky it didn’t kill all four of them.
If he’s asked if there’s any other reason to think it might have been sabotage, he’ll mention that the
sabotage technique he was taught would have made the battery put out extra power before it exploded,
which might explain why Barton felt too hot; there would be too much power going through the heater
circuits. The suit was radioactive after the explosion and would have been destroyed, with other
radioactive waste, at the power plant.
If anyone checks, the suit was destroyed a few days after the accident. Standard procedure is to put
such waste into an atomic blast, where it is reduced to elementary particles.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 164 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Cause of Death
Barton was treated by Dr. Grigori Hauser and Nurse Janice Aleman. If Hauser is run as a player
character, tell the player that he took a few notes which summarise his memories of events:

10.15 AM - Sam Barton brought in with severe injuries to back (nr. Left kidney) caused by radium battery
explosion. Wound treated in field, packed with ice (kidney frozen), highly radioactive. Administered
morphine, excised metal shards, cauterised blood vessels. Unable to retrieve all of the radium
fragments, prognosis poor.
12.45 PM - L. kidney too badly damaged for recovery, Must excise to prevent spread of necrosis.
2.10 PM - Excision apparently successful, Barton appears to be making a good recovery from surgery, has V.
strong constitution. Still abnormal levels of radiation detectable, but encouraged by progress.
Barton significantly radioactive, all personnel must wear protective clothing.
5.40 PM - Patient conscious, but very weak. Attempted to explain his condition, not sure he understood..
White blood cell count low; temperature very high. Administered morphine, febrifuge and antiemetics.
7.30 PM - Barton apparently stable, sleeping. Long term prognosis now dependent on amount of radium
absorbed… Nurse to administer iodine tablets at 3-hourly intervals. NO VISITORS!
8.00 PM - Nothing to do for Barton immediately – will visit Ewell and Bentz families for inoculations
postponed from afternoon. Everyone very concerned about Barton, of course, tried to reassure
them that there was still some hope of recovery. Unlikely, of course, but he might pull through.
10.25 PM - No change in Barton’s condition. Will attempt to do more for him tomorrow. Janice on duty until
midnight, then Loise Elwell has volunteered. Ordered hourly check of condition.
4.05 AM - Called by Louise - Barton died in his sleep, ETD approx 3.15 AM. Autopsy later.
10.30 AM - Unable to determine proximate cause of death; assume cumulative effect of injuries too much
for him. Daughter should be notified. Body stored pending funeral arrangements.
In layman’s terms Hauser treated Barton for his initial injuries (a large wound damaging his kidney),
removed the kidney because it was badly damaged and would decay if left in place, attempted to remove
shards of radium left from the battery but couldn’t find all the pieces, then tried to use palliative
treatment (painkillers, anti-nausea drugs, and fever-reducing drugs) to keep him from suffering too badly.
He left Nurse Aleman in charge, while he went to inoculate two teenagers who will be travelling to Earth
on the Huygens, then tried to get some sleep. Barton died later that night, but Hauser is unsure of the
precise cause. The body is still on ice at the hospital.
What this account doesn’t stress is that he left the hospital for more than two hours, while the
inoculation would have only taken a few minutes at each family’s home. While he was out he visited the
hotel and had several drinks; that’s where “everyone” was concerned about Barton’s health. He came
back drunk, and went to bed without examining him closely.
None of this explains precisely why Barton died – although he was likely to die, the radiation should
have taken several days to kill him.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 165 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

In fact Hauser’s drunkenness made no difference to Barton’s death. The hospital is short-staffed, so if a
patient needs to be watched overnight volunteers help out. Janice Aleman was on duty until midnight,
then Louise Elwell (see Honest Jeff’s Emporium above) took over, checking Barton’s condition every
hour. She found him dead at 4.00 AM, and immediately called for Aleman and Hauser. If questioned,
there was nobody else around when she found him dead. Hauser estimated that Barton had died about
forty-five minutes earlier, but that was a rough approximation; it could be anything between thirty
minutes and an hour before the body was found.
If Janice and Louise are questioned about visitors or intruders, Janice will say that several of Barton’s
friends came by during the evening, but were turned away without seeing him; she remembers Kenneth
McGee from the power plant (a lay preacher who came to pray for him), some of the Lucky Seven
miners (she can’t remember exactly who), Dick Curtis, Belle Nova, Mayor Williams, Jennifer Turner
(Barton’s typist and occasional mistress, although that isn’t generally known), and Jeff Elwell, who was
writing a story about the “accident” for the Titan Times.
If questioned, all of the above have some good reason to want to see how Barton is getting on (Belle
and Mayor Williams may have to lie a little). Two have additional information if questioned carefully:
Jennifer Turner won’t readily admit that she was Barton’s lover, but months later she’s still visibly
upset. Careful sympathetic questioning will reveal that she and Barton might have had a “thing” for a
while, but she tries to pretend that it never went much past a few kisses. She’s lying, of course, but not
for any nefarious reason, she just wants to protect her reputation. She does have one interesting item of
information, but won’t remember it unless she is questioned at length about the events leading up to
Barton’s death – the morning of the explosion, the Mayor phoned Barton. She doesn’t know why.
If the Mayor is an NPC he has a simple explanation; he was working on the annual budget and wanted
to ask a few questions about the mine’s use of power, water, etc. Barton said he would call him back, but
he was injured first. If he is being run by a player, the player will presumably come up with an excuse.
Kenneth McGee was present from the end of his shift (a little after 9 PM) until about eleven. He saw
Hauser return from his “out-patients” at about 10.15 but doesn’t think that he then spent much time
examining Barton: “He must have been in and out in a couple of minutes.” If Hauser has been lying
about the care he gave to his patient this will expose him; if not, all he need do is say that Barton was
asleep and looked too ill to disturb. It’s a red herring, but nobody (not even Hauser) knows that for sure.
There were no witnesses to Barton’s death. Belle Nova sneaked into the hospital and suffocated him
with a pillow while Louise was changing out of her protective clothing after the 3 AM check. She guessed
(correctly) that Barton’s nurse would check his condition exactly on the hour, but wouldn’t want to be
exposed to radioactivity any longer than absolutely necessary, so wouldn’t stay in the ward.
At the time of his death there was no obvious reason to suspect that he was suffocated; everyone
expected him to die anyway. Hauser didn’t pay any special attention to Barton’s face because he assumed
that the cause of death was his heart or kidneys. But the body is still on ice, and there were some slow
changes after death; if it is examined now there are signs of bruising on the face. There are also some
flecks of white material in his mouth and nostrils; down from a pillow. All this strongly suggests that he
was suffocated with a pillow some between 3 AM (his last medical check) and 4 AM (when the body was
found). There is no reason to doubt Hauser’s initial estimate of the time of death, about 3.15 AM, give
or take ten or fifteen minutes. Louise is adamant that she spent most of the shift in the nurse’s office next
to the ward, but did leave a couple of times – to go to the lavatory, to get coffee, and when changing
into and out of her protective clothing. This doesn’t help solve the murder, since nobody has an alibi for
that time, but it does help to establish how it was done. If Dr. Felton (the new dentist) is involved in
examining the body he will definitely notice; he’s an anaesthetist and always alert for signs of respiratory
problems.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 166 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Inner Arc P
It’s likely that Barton’s home and office will be searched at some point, even if Amanda doesn’t stay
there; if nothing else his heir needs to check for papers related to the estate, objects of sentimental value,
etc. His home is a typical underground structure with two rooms, kitchenette, and bathroom. It can be
entered from the surface or the tunnel system; most visitors would have used the tunnel. There are
scratch marks on the tunnel door’s lock, suggesting that it might have been picked; expert examination
will suggest that whoever picked it was an amateur.
On the whole the apartment is fairly tidy; if anything it’s tidier than might be expected from an
apartment used by a bachelor. The bed is made up neatly with fresh sheets, there is no dirty washing up,
and there is no rubbish in the kitchen or bathroom waste bins. One of the dresser drawers is empty, as is
one side of the wardrobe. The bathroom is very clean, and the lavatory smells of bleach. This suggests
that someone was in the apartment after Barton’s death, and possibly removed clothing or evidence from
the bathroom, the dresser and the wardrobe. There is no sign of valuables being missing; Barton’s watch
and wedding ring and a money clip containing several hundred dollars are in the bedside table drawer,
there is a framed gold nugget worth about $1200 on the wall, and a Leica camera with two lenses on
one of the shelves. There’s a film in the camera, the results are in the pictures below.
Ignoring the camera for the moment, since it will take an hour or two to get the film developed, the
most obvious (correct) assumption is that a woman removed evidence of her presence, but this should
not be pointed out by the referee. There’s evidence for this, if the apartment is searched thoroughly;
some long brown hairs in the broom and the U-bend of the bathroom basin, a brown hairpin behind the
cushion of an armchair, and a shred of metal foil under the bed that comes from a condom package.
If the adventurers talk to the neighbours, someone will eventually admit seeing “a woman” going into
Barton’s home a few nights before he was killed, but refuse to name names. If they make it seem serious
enough another neighbour will eventually say that it was Jennifer Turner, typist at the mine; she lives just
a few doors away. Once confronted, she will admit her indiscretion – it was harmless fun rather than a
serious relationship. She covered it up to avoid being branded a scarlet woman, of course. She didn’t pick
the lock, she has a key.
She doesn’t really have anything useful to add, except to say that there were some burned scraps of
paper in the bathroom basin when she removed her clothes from the apartment. She couldn’t make
anything out on what was left, and didn’t keep the paper. She didn’t notice if there was anything wrong
with the lock. She knows that flame-orchid gems can be cultured, Barton told her, but doesn’t associate
the fact with his death and won’t mention it unless someone else brings up the subject first.
Evidence in Camera
Barton wasn’t a keen photographer;
the camera and lenses originally
belonged to Amanda’s mother.
The film can be developed by Jeff Elwell ($2.50 plus 20¢ per 3x5” print) or using the hospital’s
small darkroom. Only five of twenty pictures have been used. All seem to show roughly the same thing; a
box with something granular at the bottom, possibly gravel, with something egg-like sitting in it. The
object is larger in successive pictures, suggesting that it is growing. None of the pictures are very sharp,
and the camera is aimed a little up and to the right of the object, which
implies that the photographer was trying to focus on something small and a
little too close to the camera lens, too close for the viewfinder to work
properly. The clearest picture is the fourth, and even that is blurry if examined
closely. There is nothing to indicate the scale etc. The unchanging angle
suggests the camera was on a tripod; there is no tripod in Barton’s apartment.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 167 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

If Amanda and Paula Gunn (the fake Amanda) have already visited the Lucky Seven mine they will
remember seeing a tripod leaning against the wall in a corner of Barton’s office.
If the player characters suggested at the start of this adventure are used, everyone from Titan will
immediately realise that the photographs show a flame-orchid gem growing in a box of soil. In the first
two negatives a small chunk of gem becomes more egg-like; in the last three it grows. It doesn’t look like
a particularly good specimen since there are some black marks on it which would have to be polished off
before it could be worn. Paula should roll Detective or Psychology skill against the MIND or Acting skill of
the Titan residents; if successful, she realises that they reacted to the picture, but does not know why.
Any NPCs asked either don’t know the truth or will lie about it: “Looks like some sort of fungus,”
“Maybe it’s an egg of some sort, perhaps Barton discovered a new species,” “Back on Earth I had a turtle
that laid eggs like that,” etc.
The Mayor will recognise the gem; he took it when he searched Barton’s office after he was killed.
Troubleshooting: If for any reason the adventurers don’t visit the apartment, or don’t investigate the camera, it may
be necessary to give them a little nudge via one or another NPC, or find another way to lead Amanda and Paula to
the secret of the flame-orchid gems and Barton’s interest in them. For example, Jeff Elwell might ask if Amanda
plans to sell Barton’s belongings; if so, would she be interested in selling him “your mother’s old photographic
equipment?” for his son. If they do so without checking the film he will develop it, realise what it shows, guess that
it might be important, and tell Paula (whom he thinks is Amanda) about the gems. Alternatively, they might be
suspicious of his offer and check out the camera for themselves; if so Elwell might become a suspect for a while, but
there’s no evidence against him so they should eventually look at other possibilities.
The Mayor and Belle Nova will probably be working to conceal the truth, of course, and if they come up with a
sufficiently ingenious plan they should be allowed to get away with it. Mass murder of everyone else is not an
ingenious plan; it just leads to more questions, and eventually the rival of a League patrol ship to investigate.

Samples
Barton’s office has been left more or less as it was at the time of his death; Dick Curtis and Jennifer
Turner have had to handle a lot of the papers, in order to keep things going, but otherwise they’ve left
things alone. The lock is too battered to tell if anyone has picked it.
The floor is surfaced with anti-slip plastic; there are lots of scratches and scuff marks, of course, but if
it’s examined carefully a triangle of black smudges is just visible, several circular marks overlaid as though
the tripod was set up in the same place several times, in front of a cabinet with dozens of small drawers
containing mineral samples. Mostly the contents are labelled cloth bags, cardboard boxes and glass tubes
filled with bits of rock, but one drawer is half-full of gravel and rock dust, with a small oval depression
near the front. It looks a lot like the photograph, but of course the egg-shaped object is missing. Judging
by the depression, it would have been about a half inch long.
If the photographs haven’t been found when the office is searched this won’t mean much, of course,
but the contents of the drawer are the only “sample” that isn’t labelled. If anyone wants to check the
mineralogy, it has high quartz and basalt content, contains relatively little metal but does include a small
percentage of rare earth elements, and matches the geology of the western slopes of the Mountains of the
Damned. It actually comes from one of the caves discovered by Young during the early exploration of
Titan1, but you could find virtually identical rock within a mile or so of the city. An expedition to find the
source will learn nothing useful and risks running into serious problems with weather and Titan’s native
animals. In fact flame-orchid gems will grow on most Titanian soil; they won’t grow in the open on Earth
because the atmosphere is wrong, but it would be easy to duplicate the process with a refrigerated box of
gravel containing the same elements and supplied with a xenon-oxygen mix instead of nitrogen-oxygen.
They grow best at low temperature; Barton’s stone was flawed because he grew it at room temperature.
1

Flight on Titan

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 168 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Police Enquiries
If the investigation doesn’t seem to be getting anywhere without help, it may be possible to rattle the
villains by throwing in an investigation by the police, led by Sergeant Oliviera, who will turn out to be an
Army CID Captain. He’s been assigned to Titan undercover, to investigate persistent security leaks which
have led to the loss of several ships to pirates. He’ll start to take a keen interest in Barton’s death; maybe
he was some sort of threat to the pirate spy. Oliviera should be run as a conscientious and extremely
honest cop, who has orders which allow him to ignore the Mayor if necessary. He’ll be working with the
same evidence, but he has access to army and other records which are not available to civilians. Needless
to say he will explain his mission to Williams first, as a courtesy to his nominal commanding officer, and
will instantly become suspicious if Williams tries to control the investigation or order him off the case.
Any attempt to neutralize Oliviera should backfire; if anyone tries to bribe or seduce him another
officer will be listening, if anyone tries to kill him he’s got backup ready to take out the threat. Amongst
other things, he’s organised continual radio monitoring over some frequencies that pirates sometimes use,
and any signals that Belle sends will be detected and traced to the hotel. He isn’t yet aware that flameorchids can be cultured, but it’s probably only a matter of time. Once out in the open he will check
Barton’s suit locker and office for fingerprints, and in general do everything possible to make it apparent
that the criminals will eventually be caught.
Oliviera should only be used as a last resort; it’s much more satisfying if the adventurers resolve
matters without his help.
Reading the Will
Sam’s will, last updated a few months before his death, is in his office safe; the combination is Amanda’s
date of birth. It’s a very simple document; it leaves the mine to Amanda as expected, with individual
bequests totalling a few thousand dollars to some of his employees and friends, and some local charities,
most notably:
• Dick Curtis and Jennifer Turner are each left $1000 “with thanks for your hard work and loyal
support over the years.” There are smaller bequests to his other employees.
• Doctor Hauser receives $1000, with the proviso that it is to be used for equipment for the hospital.
• Jeanette Aleman receives $500 “in memory of the care that you gave my wife in her last illness.”
• Mayor Williams receives Sam’s rifle and flame pistol.
• Belle Nova receives $100 “to be spent on my wake.”
• The library is left “my wife’s portfolio of photographs of the early days of the colony.”
• Peter Kershaw is left $250 “with thanks for your help and cooperation over the years, and hoping
that it will continue in the future.”
None of these bequests have any particular significance, with the exception of the gift to Jennifer Turner,
which may seem unusually high for a secretary.
A hand-written note to Amanda expresses his love for her, then advises her to concentrate on the core
business of the mine, and suggests some long-term strategies:
• Continue to mine gold but look for alternatives, shipment to Earth is too expensive. Uranium or
radium would pay at least as well and attract fewer pirates, and there should be a big market for
protactinium within the next few years. And don’t forget tungsten, platinum, rare earths etc!
• Don’t neglect the copper – if a League base is built there will be plenty of demand. It might be worth
investing in wire-making machinery.
• Stay out of the flame-orchid business, the price is sure to fall. The word “sure” is underlined in ink
that looks darker (and is probably more recent) than the rest of the text.
• Develop more markets – possibly the moons of Jupiter or the Venus colonies.
The will doesn’t express any preference about funeral arrangements etc., apart from mentioning a wake in
the bequest to Belle Nova.
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 169 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

Funeral Plans
One of the reasons for Amanda’s trip to Titan is to arrange for her father’s funeral. It isn’t practical to
ship the body back to Earth; it would cost more than transporting a living person, and the Christiaan
Huygens doesn’t have the spare freezer capacity anyway. It’s needed for food for the passengers. The best
alternatives are to bury him on Titan, or to cremate him so that his ashes can be transported to Earth.
Sam’s will doesn’t express any preference for type of funeral, but his wife is buried on Titan, he might
have liked to be buried next to her. She had a religious funeral.
If Amanda and Paula are still using their cover identities at this point, they need to decide how they
want to handle things; its one thing pretending to be someone else to investigate a possible murder,
another to carry on with the deception for something as solemn as a funeral. Sam Barton’s friends may
not be happy if they share their grief with someone who later turns out to be an imposter!
Most of the colonists will want to attend the ceremony, including all of the mine employees, and
probably all of the player characters. At least thirty people will turn up, including some comparative
strangers who are just there in hope of getting a free drink or two. A formal ceremony could be held at
City Hall, if it’s to become a wake the Iceberg’s ballroom may be more suitable. Catering a wake (with
some booze, nibbles, etc.) would cost a hundred dollars or so, small change for Amanda.
Nivea’s cemetery is amongst the grove of whiplash trees to the south-east of the city; bodies buried
here add nutrients to the soil, adding to the nutritional value of the trees when they are harvested and
processed as food. Graves have metal markers a few inches in diameter, atop spikes driven
into the ground; anything larger is soon blown away by the constant winds. A funeral can
be arranged in a day or so, since all of the paperwork related to the death is complete
(unless some sort of public enquiry has been initiated by the one or another of the
characters). Kenneth Magee, one of the power
plant technicians, is a Baptist lay preacher, and his church allows
him to perform marriages and funeral services since there is
currently no ordained minister on Titan; the last incumbent was
murdered a year ago (see the scenario outline Rough Justice in
the section on Titan) and has not yet been replaced.
Alternatively, the Mayor can perform a non-denominational civil
funeral. Given the weather conditions funeral services are held
indoors, with the coffin (made of compressed whiplash tree pulp)
transported to the grave by the mechanical digger, which lowers it into the grave then fills in the hole. A
few people can watch from one of the colony’s snow tractors.
The alternative is cremation. The procedure is very simple; after the service the coffin is transported
through the tunnels to the power plant and loaded into a chamber used as an incinerator, then a baffleplate is used to divert the atomic blast’s flame into the chamber for a few seconds. After that there’s
nothing left but ashes, with a few small pieces of radioactive metal left from the explosion which can
easily be removed with a Geiger counter and tweezers. They don’t reveal anything useful, but the ashes
can’t be taken on board ship unless the radioactive material is removed or they’re sealed in a lead
container, which would add considerably to their weight and the cost of transporting them to Earth. A
brass urn can be made by the workshops for a few dollars.
The funeral can be a good opportunity to plant a few clues or red herrings, overheard conversations,
etc. if things seem to be slowing down, and of course it’s an excellent opportunity for the characters to
express real (or faked) grief and observe everyone else’s behaviour. It might also be a good moment for
some sort of confrontation if (for example) someone wants to accuse someone else of murdering Sam
Barton.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 170 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

End Game
This adventure has been left open-ended, and there is no “right” or “wrong” way for the characters to
complete it. Some clues to the murder mystery are described above and summarised below; more can be
prepared as needed.
Whodunit
There is evidence that Barton’s suit was rigged to explode, and that he was suffocated after the first
attempt was unsuccessful. This may lead characters to suspect that the same person committed both
attacks, but the methods are different enough that the possibility of two killers may be considered.
• The explosion was obviously caused by someone who knew how to sabotage a radium battery and
bypass its safety devices. That implies training with explosives or nuclear engineering. Unfortunately
that leaves a big field of suspects; most of the military personnel on Titan, and quite a few civilians.
The Mayor can legitimately refuse to give anyone access to military records if he chooses to do so.
His own record shows that he has taken a demolitions course, but that’s common, many soldiers do.
• There’s evidence that someone searched Barton’s home – the scratches on the door lock, and the
burned papers Jennifer Turner saw when she collected her clothes and other belongings. Nothing
appears to be missing. The condition of the lock implies someone with some ability to pick locks, but
probably not a professional criminal. Developing the film should suggest that that something small and
egg-shaped is missing, and eventually lead to the drawer in Barton’s office.
• Unless the Mayor deliberately disposes of Barton’s gem it is still in his possession, and easily
recognizable. It would be a very valuable stone if the dark spots can be polished off, and Williams
must roll MIND versus Difficulty 6 to deliberately destroy it or throw it away. Keep track of anything
that’s said about its location – unless Williams says otherwise, assume that it is with the other stones in
his home. If Williams decides to dispose of it, how does he do so? It can be smashed, of course (roll
as above), otherwise the easiest method is probably to throw it away somewhere. But like a bad
penny, it will soon turn up again:
If it is flushed down a drain it will be found in filters at the sewage processing plant (part of the
hydroponic farm), causing a sensation. Who would flush a something that valuable, and why?
If it is dumped outside a native will find it, and bring it in to the store to trade. Jeff Elwell will
recognise it if he has seen the photograph, and give it to Amanda.
Any other disposal method should run into similar problems.
• The second attack doesn’t seem to have required any special expertise, just enough strength to
suffocate a sedated man. The medical personnel can probably be ruled out; it’s clear from the case
notes that Doctor Hauser didn’t expect Barton to survive, and he or the nurses could have easily killed
him untraceably, by a deliberate medical “error.” Given the time of night and easy access to the
hospital almost anyone could have killed him.
• At the Iceberg Hauser told some of Barton’s friends that there was still some hope that he might
recover. Perhaps the killer believed him.
• If Belle or Hauser is asked who was there, the simple answer is “everyone”; it’s where people meet to
drink and discuss the day’s events, and most people are there most nights. More than usual came in
that night, wanting to know if there was any news of Barton’s condition. Most would probably be at
least a little drunk; the only people there likely to be sober are Belle Nova and Brian Benz.
Note that these clues, in themselves, are probably not enough to find the killers. Exactly how that
happens is left open for the players and referee.
In the best tradition of romance novels and melodramas, heroes are heroes and villains are villains, and
nobody gets away with murder. If the villains feel that they are endangered they may betray themselves
by (for example) attempting to kill Amanda or another character. It’s a “given” of this genre that they
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 171 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ Have Spacesuit, Will Travel

won’t get away with it, of course, there will always be a flaw in their plans, even if the referee has to bend
the laws of the universe to make it happen. The briefing sheets for characters mention this, and referees
should encourage them to act out the parts.
In play tests this has led to (for example) the Mayor staging a shoot-out with his accusers that ended
up on the roof of City Hall (“Look at me, Ma, top of the world!”), Belle pretending to commit suicide
but actually stowing away aboard the Christiaan Huygens to await rescue by her pirate friends, Dick Curtis
sacrificing himself to save his true love, and Doctor Hauser sacrificing himself as a final act of atonement.
Of course players won’t necessarily decide to follow these stereotypes; sometimes crime does pay, and
good may compromise with evil if there’s a hefty profit. In one test Belle went completely unsuspected
because the other characters were concentrating on finding a way to manipulate the market in flameorchid gems to maximise their profits.
Will either of the visitors from Earth find true love? That’s really up to the players. Referees may
prefer to provide some NPC suitors. Some possibilities:
Raymond Oliviera might be an interesting suitor for Paula Gunn, once people know that she’s actually
a detective. He isn’t rich, but he’s a detective and ruggedly handsome, they have a lot in common.
Peter Kershaw, CEO of Titan Iron Inc., might be a good catch for Amanda. They have a lot of
common business interests, and similar backgrounds in the mining industry. While he doesn’t own his
company, he’s reasonably wealthy and would be VERY interested in merging the assets of the companies.
He’s not especially handsome, but he’ll turn out to be very romantic given the chance.
There are many other possibilities, especially for Amanda; towards the end of their stay eleven
prospectors will arrive in town, heading back to Earth with a few flame-orchid gems apiece. Any one of
them could be a good catch.

Bonus Points
If you’ve run this with the pre-generated characters they probably won’t be used again, but award points
for any or all of the following:
Amanda Barton: Finding out how Sam died, finding out who killed him, arranging his funeral, settling his
affairs so that the mine continues to operate, finding romance, acting in character.
Paula Gunn: Finding out how Sam died, finding out who killed him, keeping Amanda alive, finding
romance, making a profit, acting in character.
Dick Curtis: Staying out of trouble, finding out who killed Sam, making a profit, keeping his job (and all
the little “perks” that go with it), finding romance (preferably with a rich heiress), acting in character
Grigori Hauser: Finding out how Sam really died, determining that he is not responsible for his death,
helping with medical evidence etc., helping with science in other areas, finding a way to atone for his
tragic past, acting in character.
Richard Williams: Avoiding suspicion, framing someone else or otherwise covering tracks, avoiding arrest,
escaping if caught, acting in character, smiling and being a villain…
Belle Nova: Avoiding suspicion, avoiding arrest, getting away with the biggest possible haul if suspected,
treating as many people as possible with contempt, oozing sexuality and otherwise acting in character.
If characters from the Grand Tour campaign are used they should be awarded points according to their
role in solving the murder and neutralising the intelligence leak (Belle’s radio link to the pirates), and for
all other usual reasons. This shouldn’t be a dangerous adventure, but it’s important for the future of
Titan.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 172 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.

Credits and Legalities

M

ANY contributors have been involved in the various releases of Forgotten Futures over the last
seventeen years and it’s well-nigh impossible to name all of them. For this version in particular
thanks go especially to Brian Ameringen (Porcupine Books) and Roger Robinson (Beccon
Publications) for their help in obtaining the fiction and clarifying the copyright status of Weinbaum’s
fiction, to Simon Bradshaw for legal advice, to play-testers at various conventions and on line, and to
those who have contributed to discussion of the setting, rules rewrite, etc. via Livejournal, the
rec.arts.sf.fandom, rec.arts.sf.written and uk.games.roleplay newsgroups, and elesewhere. There are too
many to name, and I would hate to leave anyone out, so please accept the thought for the deed.
Islands in the Sky is a novel by Arthur C. Clarke. Between Planets and Have Space Suit, Will Travel are
novels by Robert A. Heinlein. Love and Rockets is a comic series by Gilbert Hernandez and Jaime
Hernandez. Load Up On Guns (Friends Optional) was suggested by Nirvana’s song Smells Like Teen Spirit.
The title of the last adventure derives from the film Earth Girls Are Easy (1988), dir. Julien Temple.

Shareware License and Distribution
Forgotten Futures is covered by all national and international copyright laws. To protect its copyright and
avoid unnecessary confusion there must be certain restrictions on its use.
In everything that follows the terms “publish” and “distribute” include putting files onto web sites,
posting material to newsgroups, bulletin boards, communities, or publication in print or on disk etc.,
regardless of whether this is done free of charge or for profit.
Shareware license terms: you may copy the files as they were originally released and distribute them as
you like, provided that no charge is made and that all information needed to register the game etc. is
included. If possible link back to my sites, rather than moving this material to your own site, in case it
becomes necessary for me to make corrections after I have put this material on line.
In legal terms, these documents are covered by the Creative Commons Attribution-No Derivative
Works License, with the following exceptions:
• If for any reason you want to edit the files for your own purposes (e.g. to add house rules, change
rules mechanisms you dislike, or use them with a completely different game system or setting) you
may do so for your own personal use, provided that the changes are not put on line or distributed
generally. This means, for example, that you may edit a version of the rules for the purposes of a
game you run for your own friends, and give them copies of the revised rules, but may not distribute
the modified files to the general public. In an on-line context any revised versions of the rules and
background material etc. must be distributed by email rather than kept on a web site, or otherwise
made inaccessible to non-participants. You must make it clear that the files are not as originally
published, acknowledge the author’s copyright, and include links back to the “official” versions.
• If you want to publish articles about the rules or settings, or describing variant rules etc. for wider
distribution, you may do so; however, such articles should be limited to a description of your own
work and the changes you have made. Write up a summary of your modifications only; do not
publish modified versions of the entire rules set, settings, or adventures or any sizeable part of them.
• The printed versions of the rules and other gaming material formerly published by Heliograph Inc.
were not released as shareware, differ in some respects from the versions published on line, and are
not covered by these terms; you may not copy them.
For details of the Creative Commons Attribution-No Derivative Works License see
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/legalcode

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 173 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.

Copyright
Unless stated otherwise all text in this collection is either Copyright © Marcus L. Rowland 2008-2010, or
is by Stanley G. Weinbaum and is out of all copyright (including editorial copyright) under current
European law.
Briefly, to be out of copyright in Europe a work must be written by an author who has been dead for
at least seventy years; in the case of collaborations all authors concerned must be dead for a minimum of
seventy years. There are also two other restrictions on copyright; works published for the first time after
the author’s death remain in copyright for 70 years after their first publication, and edited works remain
in copyright for 25 years after they have been edited (this does not appear to apply to facsimile editions).
There are also exemptions for “fair use” in e.g. quoting briefly from work which remains in copyright. For
these reasons:
• Tidal Moon could not be included since it was completed posthumously by Helen Weinbaum and
remains in copyright. Quotes from it have been included as fair use. It is available on line elsewhere.
• Two short stories outside the Planetary sequence, Smothered Seas (1936) and Revolution of 1950
(1938), were written in collaboration with Ralph Milne Farley (1887-1963) and remain in European
copyright. They are available on line from sources outside the European Union.
• The Dark Other aka The Mad Brain could not be included; it was first published posthumously in 1950
and remains in copyright. It is available in print.
• A poem, The Last Martian, was first published posthumously in 1943 and could not be included.

Art Index
Unless stated otherwise all art in this collection is Copyright © Marcus L. Rowland 2008-10 or is
copyright-expired. Some NASA and other imagery released into the public domain has been included or
used as e.g. backgrounds to illustrations.
Software used included PaintShop Pro 4, Corel Photo-Paint and Microsoft Picture It! for bit-mapped
images, Micrografyx Draw and Corel Draw 12 for vector-mapped images, Caligari TrueSpace 3.2 for 3D
modelling, and Planets by Larry Puhl (with DosBox MS-DOS emulator) for orbital calculations and initial
orbital tracks. Celestia, an excellent free solar system modelling program, was used for some images.
All of the pictures from this PDF can be accessed on line as separate images via the HTML version of
this file. In many cases they are somewhat larger than the versions in the PDF.
Front cover
2
13, 23 (lower)
22 (map)
22 (picture)
23 (upper)
25
26
27
28-30
32
34, 35, 99, 103
37 (upper)
37 (lower), 39, 40
45 (upper)
45 (lower)
47

MLR, TrueSpace model with various photo edits. NASA – Moon, star fields.
Copyright-expired photograph, source Wikimedia Commons, photographer unknown.
MLR, after diagrams by Stephen Oxley. All errors are mine.
Source Wikimedia Commons – Schiaparelli's 1886 map of Mars showing the locations of
events in A Martian Odyssey. Edited by Johnny Pez; released to public domain
MLR, 3D models, Schiaparelli's Mars based on 19th century globe, NASA star field
NASA, modified for this version of the Solar System.
NASA
NASA, modified (firefighter’s headgear substituted for helmet, new background and colour)
MLR, 3D model, star field NASA
MLR
MLR, based on map by Vardion released via Wikimedia Commons
Stills from Just Imagine, Fox, 1930 – believed to be out of copyright.
Schiaparelli’s map of Mars, 1896.
MLR
MLR, based on orbits plotted by Planets by Larry Puhl
MLR, Moon photo Nikon D50, 500mm mirror lens, asteroid images TrueSpace 3D models.
NASA

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 174 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.
49
50
51
52
54
55
56

57 (upper)
58
61
62, 63 (upper)
63 (lower)
64, 65, 68
67, 69
70
71
73
74 (main text)
74 (sidebar)
75
78
84 (upper)
84 (lower)
92
93, 94
95
96 (upper)
96 (lower), 97
105-7, 108 (lower)
108 (upper)
109
111
112
113
114, 117, 122
116
118, 120, 123
121
124, 134 (logo)
125
127
129 (upper)
129 (lower), 130
134, 138, 139
135
136
140-148
151

Celestia image, manipulated for watercolour effect, edited to add moon sizes.
NASA, manipulated to add jungle etc.
Edited illustration (originally a dinosaur with rider) by Lawson Wood, from Pre-Historic TittleTattle by Fox Russell, 1903. For the original see the Forgotten Futures CD-ROM.
MLR, manipulation based on rat and bat illustrations from copyright-expired sources.
Edited illustration (originally a lizard-like monster) by Warwick Goble, from How Will The
World End by H.C.Fyfe, 1900. The article is included with Forgotten Futures V
NASA, Europa adding satellite imagery of Alaskan mountains etc.
MLR, composite from various sources, Jupiter image NASA
NASA, Ganymede image, edited to add seas, (middle) MLR, (bottom) MLR
MLR
NASA, minor edits
Celestia images, minor edits.
MLR, crystals photographed using Intelplay QX-3 microscope, colours edited
MLR, composites from various sources.
NASA images
Celestia, image manipulated to add texture and surface features
MLR, TrueSpace model with various photo edits. Pluto image as above modified for “line
drawing” effect.
MLR, Corel Draw image, Celestia background.
NASA, V2 missile, colorised and manipulated.
MLR, TrueSpace model with various photo edits. NASA – Moon, star fields.
NASA, NERVA atomic engine – source Wikimedia Commons
MLR, composite from various sources.
MLR, Truespace 3D model with photo edits.
MLR
Peress ‘Tritonia’ diving suit 1925, desert background, colorised, etc.
MLR, Composites from various sources.
MLR, Corel Draw image
MLR, TrueSpace 3D model
MLR, Composites from various sources.
Screen shots from various copyright-expired 1920s-1930s films, some face transplants,
editing etc.
MLR, 1930s airport buildings, Corel Draw model, various edits and effect filters.
MLR, Corel Draw image based on orbits plotted by Planets by Larry Puhl
MLR, Corel Draw images
Controls of Douglas DC3, NASA star field
British Gas, obsolete boiler room equipment
Screen shots from various copyright-expired 1920s-1930s films, some editing etc.
Copyright-expired from Wikimedia Commons, edited to show whole plant only.
MLR, composites from various sources.
MLR, Corel Draw image
Public domain images, Wikimedia Commons
MLR, composite from various sources.
Alvis Stalwart amphibious truck, some edits.
MLR, from Corel Draw original
MLR
MLR, from Corel Draw original
MLR, fractal generated by Fractint software.
MLR, modified NASA image, source Wikimedia Commons.
MLR
NASA and US Geological Service images (Saturn over Mount Erebus, Antarctica)

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 175 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.
152
154-156
158
159
164
167
170 (marker)
170 (vehicle)

MLR
Screen shots from various copyright-expired 1920s-1930s films, some editing etc.
MLR, composite from various sources.
MLR
Public domain image, 1920s autopsy instruments
Both MLR
MLR
Public domain image edited to change logo, source Wikimedia Commons.

Useful Sources
A Step Further Out 2 by Jerry Pournelle; This book includes articles which contain useful information on
energy requirements for space travel, which have been ludicrously over-simplified for this setting. Similar
information is also available on Wikipedia etc.
XKCD comics has published several strips related to the problems of space travel, the distances of
astronomical objects, etc. I particularly recommend
Gravity Wells – http://xkcd.com/681/
The observable universe from top to bottom – http://xkcd.com/482/
Atomic Rocketships of the Space Patrol is a web site that’s a useful source on real-world engineering
solutions to the problems of space travel. This would be of more use in a more realistic setting, but it’s
still packed with interesting ideas.
http://www.projectrho.com/rocket/index.html
The Custom of the Sea: The True Story That Changed British Law by Neil Hanson is a fascinating account
of the “custom of the sea” that at one time condoned cannibalism and murder under certain
circumstances, and of the legal case which finally made it a criminal offence.
http://www.amazon.co.uk/Custom-Sea-Story-Changed-British/dp/0552147605
Wikipedia was an essential secondary source for this game, repeatedly helping me if I couldn’t remember
the source for a particular idea or event. Its articles on Stanley Weinbaum, on the Planetary series, and on
the individual stories of the series were essential resources. The article on the Planetary series includes a
more extensive glossary than I could include in the game, an extensive list of characters, etc. There are
some differences in the chronology and technological background described in this article; for various
reasons it was necessary to make numerous changes to draw all of the stories into a coherent whole
suitable for game purposes. Alert readers will notice, for example, that the League and the Patrol are
barely mentioned.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanley_G._Weinbaum
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planetary_series

Coming Attractions
The working title for Forgotten Futures XII is Empire of Earth. At the moment sources are still being
assembled, but they will probably include one of the earliest novels of interstellar warfare, The Struggle for
Empire by Robert W. Cole, and other important works in this genre.
Writing these games is a lot of work and takes a lot of time, and I can only continue if readers support
Forgotten Futures by registering and buying the Forgotten Futures CD-ROM. If you want to see me
continue, please follow the links below and register on line, or contact me for other registration methods.
Marcus L. Rowland ~ October 31st 2010
www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 176 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.

Weapons Summary
WEAPON
.45 AUTOMATIC
.38 / .380 / 9MM

SHOTS/RD
(AMMO)
2 (8)
2 (10)

AUTOMATIC

.357 RIFLE

1 (5)

40MM MACHINE

5 (belt 400)

CANNON

MARTIAN PISTOL

1 (128)

FLAME PISTOL
FLAME CANNON
BLASTER (GRENADE)
STUNNER

1/3rd (1)
1/2rd (belt 30)
n/a
1 (n/a)

MULTIPLE
TARGETS?
max 2

AMMUNITION

Normal
Fragmenting
Explosive
max 2
Normal
Fragmenting
Explosive
No
Normal
Explosive
full auto
Normal
Explosive
No
Dart
and Toxin
Cone 300ft x 20ft
Cone 300ft x 20ft
Explosion, radius 30ft
No
Sound pulse

EFFECT

A

B

C

9
6
7+12
7
5
5+8
10
9+12
10
9+14
4
4+1/rd
30
30
25+2D6
8

I
F
F
I
F
F
I
I
I
F
F
F
I
I
I
B

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
C/K
C/K
C/K
KO+B

C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
C/K
K
KO/KO+I

NOTE
1
2

1
2

2

3

4
5
6
7
8

Notes
1. Will not penetrate spaceship hulls.
2. Explosion radius 4ft, roll for explosive damage if the bullet hits the target or another object inside the blast
radius.
3. Explosion radius 6ft, roll for explosive damage if the bullet hits the target or another object inside the blast
radius. Vehicle / Tripod mounted weapon ONLY.
4. Darts can cause wounds by penetration, like any other small projectile, and carry a toxin which affects Martian
organisms only – no effect on humans. Roll for toxin damage only if a Martian organism is shot.
5. Range 300ft, Radius 20ft, barrel shatters on 10-11, replacement takes 40 minutes. chamber shatters on 12,
not repairable. Ammo cost $10 / shot, Barrel cost $5; barrels cannot be swapped between different models.
6. Range 300ft, Radius 20ft, barrel (swapped out after shot automatically) shatters on 11; replacement takes 10
minutes during reloading. Chamber shatters on 12, not repairable. Ammo cost $10 / shot, Barrel cost $12.
Barrels cannot be swapped between different models. Vehicle / Tripod mounted weapon ONLY.
7. A hand-thrown nuclear weapon equivalent to several tons of conventional explosives. They cannot be thrown far
enough to avoid injury under Earth gravity, but can be used with a timer, trip wire, etc. Detonation takes 2-3
rounds after the pin is pulled.
8. Useless in a vacuum, affects humans only, runs on radium power pack and never needs reloading. Injuries can
include epileptic fits, concussion, nosebleeds, etc. It would probably be possible to design a stunner that affected
alien species but none are commercially available. Any multi-species design will probably only be able to affect
one species at a time, e.g. on the Venusian setting humans would be unaffected, and vice versa. Martians have
their brains in their bodies, not the head, and should be assumed to be more resistant to stunning than humans.

Martian Pistol

Flame Pistol

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 177 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Stunner

Forgotten Futures XI ~ Planets of Peril ~ End Notes, Tables, etc.

Forgotten Futures XI - Spaceship Design Record
Blast type

Game Data

Emergency acceleration

BODY

Cruising acceleration

Armour Rating

Horizontal landing, wings & underjets?

Engineering Difficulty

Military or weapons permit?

Piloting Difficulty

Supply endurance, weeks
Racing engine?
Tons

Cost

Quantity

Cramped / shared cabins, etc.

0.30

$500

Individual cabins, moderate comfort

0.60

$1,200

Luxurious accommodation

1.50

$2,500

Head (shower and lavatory)

0.50

$4,200

Cargo hold (per ton of cargo)

1.10

$250

Fuel (hold or tank including mass of fuel)

1.10

$250

Life support equipment (per passenger)

0.20

$150

Supplies storage per person per week

0.30

$250.00

Controls, per pilot

0.50

$1,200.00

Radio (short range)

0.10

$500.00

Radio (interplanetary range)

1.50

$15,000.00

Meteor warning device

0.10

$1,200.00

Electric “plumb” altimeter

0.10

$1,200.00

Multi-function meteor warning / plumb

0.10

$1,800.00

Air lock

0.50

$2,500.00

Space suit recharge point

0.10

$1,100.00

Total
tons

Total
cost

Galley (variable cost and tonnage)

Algae “farm” (variable cost and tonnage)

Fixed or turret-mounted machine gun

0.20

$750.00

Fixed or turret-mounted flame gun

0.20

$3,000.00

Turret for weapons

0.50

$5,500.00
Payload & Fuel
Engines

Engine maintenance per annum

Totals

Life support per flight
Cruising fuel consumption & Endurance
Full thrust fuel consumption & Endurance

Tons / day

Days

Tons / hr

Hours

A spaceship design spreadsheet template (Excel format) can be downloaded from the author’s web site.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ 178 ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk

Remember how the future used to be?
When vast fleets of flying ships blackened the sky…
When psychic investigators used electric pentacles…
When Venus was a paradise, never fallen from grace…
When the government’s main job was to make the airships run on time…
When a gentleman could build his own spaceship and still have change of a million pounds…
When there were still dinosaurs and monsters in the unexplored corners of the Earth…
When you could find a complete role playing game with eleven supplements on line…

FORGOTTEN FUTURES

THE SCIENTIFIC ROMANCE ROLE PLAYING GAME
BY

MARCUS L ROWLAND

A complete ready-to-play RPG including rules, source material, game settings, and adventures based on Victorian
and Edwardian science fiction. All of the core game and support material can be downloaded and used free of
charge, with additional material on CD-ROM for registered users.

www.forgottenfutures.com ~ On line and on CD-ROM ~ www.forgottenfutures.co.uk
Illustration by Fred T. Jane for Olga Romanoff or The Syren of the Skies by George Griffith, one of the books accompanying Forgotten Futures

It was a time of myth and legend… Known as the Twentieth
Century… Mankind called out for a hero. She was…

Diana: Warrior Princess
BByy M
Maarrccuuss LL.. R
Roow
wllaanndd
IIlllluussttrraatteedd bbyy A
Aaarroonn W
Wiilllliiaam
mss

Imagine our world, seen by someone as remote from us as we are from the
ancient Greeks, and with as many gaps in their knowledge. Imagine it converted
into a TV series by a production company with the loving attention to historical
accuracy we have come to expect from such series. Then imagine the RPG of
that series...
Throw realism out of the window. Run adventures in which Eva Peron is Hitler's mistress, or JFK meets Queen
Victoria. Zulu hordes swarm across Vietnam, the Spanish Inquisition stalk heretics in Manhattan, steam cars co-exist
with ICBMs, Babbage engines, stealth bombers and sorcerers.
This is the world of Diana: Warrior Princess.

Available as a PDF from Steve Jackson Games and Drivethru RPG
Also available in PDF ~ the first Diana: Warrior Princess supplement ~ Elvis: The Legendary Tours

FFrroom
Diiaannaa:: W
Waarrrriioorr PPrriinncceessss
m tthhee C
Crreeaattoorr ooff FFoorrggootttteenn FFuuttuurreess aanndd D

Imagine a world of two dimensions and plane geometry, in which the very idea of height is considered insanity and
the darkest heresy. Where the only thing that matters is the straightness of your sides and the regularity of your
angles. Where the slightest deviation from the norm can lead to arrest, imprisonment, execution (and consumption
by your peers) or a lingering death by starvation.

Welcome to Flatland. Enjoy your stay…
Venus, where the fungi and spores will eat you if the plants and natives don’t!
Mars, home of cryptic friendly natives at least as intelligent as mankind!
Io, the jungle moon, where tiny natives view humans with hostile eyes!
Europa, an unspoiled Eden where mankind may be the serpent!
Ganymede, the tidal moon, where you either swim or die!
Titan, Eskimo hell, source of the most beautiful gems in the solar system!
Uranus, the great enigma, a huge habitable world that’s still almost unexplored!
Pluto, lair of the pirate queen Red Peri, and home to strange and deadly living crystals!

